This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.



                                                                                                                                                                              Enhancing Positron Production using Front Surface Target Structures
                                                                                                                                                                                        S. Jiang,1, a) A. Link,1 D. Canning,2 J. A. Fooks,3 P. A. Kempler,4 S. Kerr,1 J. Kim,5 M. Krieger,2 N. S. Lewis,6
                                                                                                                                                                                        R. Wallace,1 G. J. Williams,1 S. Yalamanchili,6 and H. Chen1
                                                                                                                                                                                        1)
                                                                                                                                                                                           Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, California 94550, USA
                                                                                                                                                                                        2)
                                                                                                                                                                                           Laboratory For Laser Energetics, Rochester, New York 14623, USA
                                                                                                                                                                                        3)
                                                                                                                                                                                           General Atomics, San Diego, California 92121, USA
                                                                                                                                                                                        4)
                                                                                                                                                                                           California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA
                                                                                                                                                                                        5)
                                                                                                                                                                                           Center for Energy Research, University of California San Diego, San Diego, California 92093,
                                                                                                                                                                                        USA
                                                                                                                                                                                        6)
                                                                                                                                                                                           California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 92093, USA
                                                                                                                                                                                        (Dated: 5 February 2021)
                                                                                                                                                                                        We report a target design which produced a substantial gain in relativistic electron-positron pair production
                                                                                                                                                                                        using high-intensity lasers and targets with large-scale micro-structures on their surface. Comparing to
                                                                                                                                                                                        an unstructured target, a selected Si microwire array target yielded a near 100% increase in the laser-to-
                                                                                                                                                                                        positron conversion efficiency and produced a 10 MeV increase in the average emitted positron energy under
                                                                                                                                                                                        nominally the same experimental conditions. We had established a multi-scale particle-in-cell simulation
                                                                                                                                                                                        scheme to simulate both the laser absorption and the subsequent pair productions in a thick metal target.
                                                                                                                                                                                        The experimental results are supported by the simulations demonstrating the performance increase is due to
                                                                                                                                                                                        a higher conversion efficiency of laser energy into electrons with kinetic energies greater than 10 MeV due to
                                                PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0038222




                                                                                                                                                                                        enhanced direct laser acceleration of electrons enabled by the microwire array.


                                                                                                                                                                                 Producing a high-density, relativistic electron-positron      yield reported to date by use of lasers.
                                                                                                                                                                              pair plasma in the laboratory could significantly deepen
                                                                                                                                                                              the understanding of exotic astrophysical objects such
                                                                                                                                                                              as pulsars and quasars, but is extremely challenging1–5 .




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             29 November 2024 02:28:26
                                                                                                                                                                              With the advances in high intensity laser technology, sev-
                                                                                                                                                                              eral methods for pair production have been either demon-
                                                                                                                                                                              strated or proposed, with different mechanisms domi-
                                                                                                                                                                              nating the physics in different regimes of laser intensity.
                                                                                                                                                                              For example, the Schwinger mechanism6 requires an ex-
                                                                                                                                                                              tremely high intensity, above ∼1029 W/cm2 , for spon-
                                                                                                                                                                              taneous pair creation from vacuum, whereas the Breit-
                                                                                                                                                                              Wheeler (BW) mechanism7 requires about 1024 W/cm2
                                                                                                                                                                              for avalanche-type discharge8,9 . These intensities are far
                                                                                                                                                                              beyond the capability of state-of-the-art lasers (up to
                                                                                                                                                                              1022 W/cm2 ).
                                                                                                                                                                                 An alternative method is to inject laser produced high-
                                                                                                                                                                              energy electrons into high-Z target materials4,10–16 , with
                                                                                                                                                                              the electrostatic field of the nucleus involved in the pair
                                                                                                                                                                              production process releasing the constraint on the laser
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FIG. 1. (a) Schematic diagram of the experimental setup.
                                                                                                                                                                              electric field intensity. If a thick converter target is used,   (b) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the pre-
                                                                                                                                                                              positrons are mainly produced through the 3-step Bethe-          optimized target structure 1. (c) SEM image of the unopti-
                                                                                                                                                                              Heitler (BH) process17 . First, relativistic electrons are       mized structure 2.
                                                                                                                                                                              generated through a laser plasma interaction (LPI) at the
                                                                                                                                                                              front side of the target. These electrons then transport            A key to higher positron yield is the production of
                                                                                                                                                                              through the high-Z material and produce high-energy              hotter electrons. Substantial enhancement in electron
                                                                                                                                                                              photons via Bremsstrahlung radiation. Propagation of             energies can be obtained by manipulating the laser-
                                                                                                                                                                              the high-energy photons in the field of nucleus then cre-        plasma interaction using a structured target18,19 . Specif-
                                                                                                                                                                              ates electron-positron pairs. The key step is to transfer        ically, highly-ordered silicon microwire arrays facing the
                                                                                                                                                                              laser energy into enough high-energy (10s of MeV) elec-          laser pulse enable guiding the relativistic electron beam
                                                                                                                                                                              trons, for which, only a moderate intensity laser (∼ 1020        along the structured surface and moreover facilitate a
                                                                                                                                                                              W/cm2 ) is needed. Experiments using this type of setup          direct laser acceleration mechanism. Such an electron
                                                                                                                                                                              have produced up to 1012 pairs/shot, which is the highest        beam can then create a substantial enhancement in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Bremstrahlung radiation produced by a high-Z conver-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tor target20 . The Bremsstrahlung x-rays further inter-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               act with atomic nuclei and create more electron-positron
                                                                                                                                                                              a) Electronic mail: jiang8@llnl.gov
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               pairs.
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2

                                                                                                                                                                                 We demonstrate herein experimentally a substantial
                                                                                                                                                                              enhancement in both the yield and the energy of gen-
                                                                                                                                                                              erated positrons using target structures, which suggests
                                                                                                                                                                              an efficient and inexpensive approach to improvement of
                                                                                                                                                                              positron sources. Particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations with
                                                                                                                                                                              the code Chicago21 have been used to explain the ex-
                                                                                                                                                                              perimental results and have allowed a direct simulation
                                                                                                                                                                              of the LPI effects on the positron yield. Moreover, the
                                                                                                                                                                              simulation is in good qualitative agreement with the ex-
                                                                                                                                                                              perimental data.
                                                                                                                                                                                 A schematic diagram of the experimental setup is
                                                                                                                                                                              shown in Figure 1(a). The structured target was irradi-
                                                                                                                                                                              ated with the OMEGA EP laser pulse, with a wavelength
                                                                                                                                                                              of 1.053 µm, an energy of 500 J, and a pulse length of ap-
                                                                                                                                                                              proximately 700 fs. 80% of the laser energy was enclosed
                                                                                                                                                                              in a 35 µm diameter focal spot as is derived from an
                                                                                                                                                                              on-shot wavefront and far-field measurement. The peak
                                                                                                                                                                              intensity was estimated to be 4.5×1020 W/cm2 according
                                                                                                                                                                              to the measured fluence map. Prior to the experiment,
                                                PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0038222




                                                                                                                                                                              the structure geometry (spacing and length) was opti-
                                                                                                                                                                              mized through PIC simulations of the hot electron tem-
                                                                                                                                                                              perature. This geometry, which we call structure 1, is an
                                                                                                                                                                              array of silicon microwires with 3 µm diameter, 13 µm
                                                                                                                                                                              length and 15 µm center-to-center transverse distance.
                                                                                                                                                                              For reference, we have also shot flat targets as well as
                                                                                                                                                                              another type of unoptimized structure (structure 2) that




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           29 November 2024 02:28:26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FIG. 2. Experimentally measured spectra for (a) positrons
                                                                                                                                                                              showed detrimental effects on electron energies in simu-     and (b) electrons. Different colors indicate the results from
                                                                                                                                                                              lations. Structure 2 had 3 µm diameter, 100 µm length        different targets under the same laser conditions.
                                                                                                                                                                              and 7 µm center-to-center distance. The microwires in
                                                                                                                                                                              the latter target had much longer lengths than the laser
                                                                                                                                                                              depth-of-focus, and much smaller space in between them          The experimental positron and electron spectra for
                                                                                                                                                                              than the laser focal spot size, so they tend to break the    3 different types of targets are shown in Figure 2(a)
                                                                                                                                                                              laser pulse during its propagation, resulting in a poor      and (b). Target structure 1 generated about 50% more
                                                                                                                                                                              laser intensity at the critical density surface. Conse-      positrons than the regular flat target, and its laser to
                                                                                                                                                                              quently they led to a low-energy electron spectrum.          positron conversion efficiency increased by ∼97% com-
                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 1(b) and (c) show scanning electron microscope     pared to the flat substrate. The spectrum peak also
                                                                                                                                                                              images of both target structures used in the experiment.     shifted from ∼50 MeV for the flat target to ∼60 MeV
                                                                                                                                                                              The Si microwire arrays 100 µm in height (structure 2)       for structure 1. Structure 2 showed fewer as well as
                                                                                                                                                                              were first grown on a Si < 111 > wafer by the vapor-         much lower-energy positrons, in accord with expectations
                                                                                                                                                                              liquid-solid growth method22 , whereas the shorter mi-       as the length and spacing of the microwires encumber
                                                                                                                                                                              crowire arrays (structure 1) were etched from Si < 100 >     the laser focusing. The electron spectrum from struc-
                                                                                                                                                                              wafers via Deep Reactive Ion Etching23 . The microwires      ture 2 also showed the same trend, in agreement with
                                                                                                                                                                              were then embeded in a ∼30 µm thick polydimethylsilox-       the positron measurements. However, the electron spec-
                                                                                                                                                                              ane layer and peeled off of the substrate. This thin poly-   tra from flat and from structure 1 were mutually similar,
                                                                                                                                                                              dimethylsiloxane layer was then glued to a 1mm thick         with both having an electron temperature of about 21
                                                                                                                                                                              Au backing layer. In this case, the high-energy elec-        MeV.
                                                                                                                                                                              trons generated and guided by the surface structures            Multiple simulations to model the entire process were
                                                                                                                                                                              would transport through a thick high-Z material (Au)         performed to elucidate why the measured positron spec-
                                                                                                                                                                              and induce pair production. The transverse size of the       trum from structure 1 is obviously superior while its elec-
                                                                                                                                                                              Au block used in the experiment was also 1mm. The            tron spectrum is similar to that from flat target. The
                                                                                                                                                                              laser was directed at normal incidence onto the target       simulations used the same laser conditions and target ge-
                                                                                                                                                                              and the microwire arrays were oriented along the laser       ometries as the experiment. We fitted the measured laser
                                                                                                                                                                              direction. This configuration has been shown in previ-       fluence map with two Gaussian functions to maintain the
                                                                                                                                                                              ous work to yield the highest enhancement of electron        intensity distribution of the experiment. The OMEGA
                                                                                                                                                                              energy18,19 . The positron spectra were measured by an       EP laser had a substantial prepulse that could affect the
                                                                                                                                                                              electron/positron spectrometer on the back side of the       conversion efficiency from the laser to fast electrons, and
                                                                                                                                                                              target along the laser direction (which was also the tar-    would therefore affect the yield and energy of positrons.
                                                                                                                                                                              get normal direction).                                       The facility has an on-shot prepulse measurment from 3
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0038222




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     29 November 2024 02:28:26
                                                                                                                                                                              FIG. 3. (a) Initial ion density for 2D Cartesian LPI simulations. (b) Schematic diagram of simulation setups. We have injected
                                                                                                                                                                              the fast electrons derived from LPI simulation to the following transport simulation after converting the electron source from
                                                                                                                                                                              Cartesian to cylindrical geometry. (c) Electron spectra inside the target from 2D Cartesian LPI simulations (dashed curves,
                                                                                                                                                                              right y axis) and spectra of injected electron source for 2D cylindrical transport simulations (solid curves, left y axis). (d) Blue
                                                                                                                                                                              curve (right y axis) shows the probability of one positron generated by one 0◦ , monoenergetic electron transporting through a
                                                                                                                                                                              1mm thick, 1mm diameter Au target, without considering any field effects. The black and red curves (with respect to the left
                                                                                                                                                                              y axis) show injection electron spectra multiplied by the positron generation probability as a function of energy.


                                                                                                                                                                              ns to 1 ns prior to the main laser pulse. For the pre-              been recorded. We then processed the laser-generated
                                                                                                                                                                              pulse within 1 ns, we assumed a similar profile to that             electrons to get their distribution as a function of en-
                                                                                                                                                                              measured by Dorrer et al. on OMEGA EP24 . The total                 ergy, angle, transverse distance, and time. At this point,
                                                                                                                                                                              energy of the prepulse was about 3.5 mJ. Hydrodynamic               we assumed a rotational symmetry along the laser prop-
                                                                                                                                                                              simulations with the code HYDRA25 were used to cal-                 agation axis for both space and velocity, and converted
                                                                                                                                                                              culate the preplasma profile, as is shown in Figure 3(a).           the distribution to cylindrical coordinates. The transport
                                                                                                                                                                              The preplasma scale length between relativistic critical            simulation was performed in a 2D cylindrical geometry.
                                                                                                                                                                              density and critical density is about 2 µm and the scale            When hot electrons leave the target, they would create a
                                                                                                                                                                              length below critical density is 10 µm.                             strong sheath field on the back side. It is critical to model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  the sheath field properly to obtain the correct yield and
                                                                                                                                                                                 Full 3D PIC simulations to model all physics processes           spectrum. The cylindrical geometry is required to accu-
                                                                                                                                                                              are impractical with current supercomputers. We instead             rately model the 1/r2 fall-off of the E field, whereas the
                                                                                                                                                                              adopted a two-stage approach that has been demon-                   2D Cartesian geometry would result in a 1/r fall-off. The
                                                                                                                                                                              strated on other targets26,27 to simulate LPI and trans-            hot electrons were then re-sampled according to its distri-
                                                                                                                                                                              port processes separately. Both stages were performed               bution and injected into a 1mm thick, 1mm diameter Au
                                                                                                                                                                              with the code Chicago21 . The overall simulation process            target in a 2D cylindrical geometry. Positron generation
                                                                                                                                                                              is illustrated in Figure 3(b). First a 2D Cartesian ge-             and transport was then simulated both inside and behind
                                                                                                                                                                              ometry was used to simulate the LPI process, with only              the Au target. To compare with the experimental results,
                                                                                                                                                                              x and z dimensions modeled in space. However, the ve-               statistics of escaped electrons and positrons were per-
                                                                                                                                                                              locity was 3D as all 3 components vx , vy and vz were               formed at another extraction plane that was 2mm from
                                                                                                                                                                              updated at each time step. We could not use a cylindri-             the backside of the target.
                                                                                                                                                                              cal geometry because the laser was linearly polarized in
                                                                                                                                                                              the x direction. The electrons were measured at a plane                The electron spectra generated from the LPI simula-
                                                                                                                                                                              that was 5 µm inside the target. The energy, direction,             tions are shown in Figure 3(c). The dashed curves are the
                                                                                                                                                                              position and time of each electron macroparticle have all           raw distributions derived in Cartesian coordinates and
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4

                                                                                                                                                                              the solid curves are converted distributions in cylindrical
                                                                                                                                                                              coordinates. Note that the 2D Cartesian simulation has
                                                                                                                                                                              a virtual dimension in y axis so the electron spectrum
                                                                                                                                                                              has a different unit, corresponding to the right y aixs in
                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 3(c). The electron temperatures Te for different
                                                                                                                                                                              portions of the spectra are also labeled in the plot. Af-
                                                                                                                                                                              ter conversion, the temperature for higher-energy-range
                                                                                                                                                                              electrons is maintained at around 20 MeV, which is quite
                                                                                                                                                                              close to the experimentally measured temperature of 21
                                                                                                                                                                              MeV. Lower energy electrons have a wider angular dis-
                                                                                                                                                                              tribution and thus tend to be more easily affected by the
                                                                                                                                                                              conversion. Te decreased by about 3MeV for electrons
                                                                                                                                                                              within 25 − 70 MeV. Comparing structure 1 (red) to flat
                                                                                                                                                                              (black), the main difference appears at energies above 25
                                                                                                                                                                              MeV, as structure 1 tends to produce about an order of
                                                                                                                                                                              magnitude more electrons within this energy range.
                                                                                                                                                                                 To evaluate the positron yield by different electron
                                                                                                                                                                              spectra, in Figure 3(d) we have plotted f (E)·Pe+ (E),
                                                                                                                                                                              where f (E) is the spectrum of injected electrons (solid
                                                PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0038222




                                                                                                                                                                              curves in Figure 3(c)), and Pe+ (E) is the probability
                                                                                                                                                                              that one positron could be generated and exit from the
                                                                                                                                                                              1mm thick, 1mm diameter Au target as one incident elec-
                                                                                                                                                                              tron with energy E is normally injected. Pe+ (E) (blue
                                                                                                                                                                              curve) was obtained using a Monte Carlo code MCNP28
                                                                                                                                                                              and the field effects have been ignored. Note that we
                                                                                                                                                                              cannot directly compare the positron yield from MCNP          FIG. 4. (a) Positron spectra at 0◦ from simulations. (b)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            29 November 2024 02:28:26
                                                                                                                                                                              to the experimental result as the escaped positron yield      Electron spectra at 0◦ (solid lines, with unit MeV−1 sr−1 on
                                                                                                                                                                              and spectra is also largely affected by the self-generated    the left y axis) and overall electron spectra (dashed lines,
                                                                                                                                                                              field. MCNP only provides an estimation of the positron       with unit MeV−1 on the right y axis). Note that the two
                                                                                                                                                                              production capability of different energy electrons. The      different spectra plotted have mutually different units. We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            have also plotted corresponding experimental spectra at 0◦ in
                                                                                                                                                                              positron production probability grows sharply with en-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the background for comparison.
                                                                                                                                                                              ergy for incident electrons below ∼30 MeV and gradually
                                                                                                                                                                              saturates at high energies. The black and red solid curves
                                                                                                                                                                              indicate the calculated f (E)·Pe+ (E) for flat and struc-
                                                                                                                                                                              tured targets, respectively. Both curves peak at about        because the experimentally measured spectra include
                                                                                                                                                                              15 MeV. However, electrons within 25 − 150 MeV from           electrons that are generated at much later times than
                                                                                                                                                                              structure 1 contributed to a great extent to the positron     those covered by the simulation. The simulated spectra
                                                                                                                                                                              yield, whereas for the flat target most of the positrons      showed less particles at high energies. However, accord-
                                                                                                                                                                              are generated by lower energy electrons. Overall, the in-     ing to Figure 3(d), electrons above 110 MeV would make
                                                                                                                                                                              jection spectrum from structure 1 produced about 30%          a negligible contribution to the positron yield. These
                                                                                                                                                                              more positrons than the flat target. Note that this es-       high energy electrons have a small impact on the sheath
                                                                                                                                                                              timation does not consider any field or electron reflux       field as well because their total charge is low. Therefore,
                                                                                                                                                                              effects that in reality play an important role.               the simulated positron and electron spectra indicate that
                                                                                                                                                                                 The Monte Carlo simulation only provides an intu-          the injected electron source from LPI simulation models
                                                                                                                                                                              itive view of the pair production capability of LPI elec-     the experimental condition reasonably well. For both the
                                                                                                                                                                              trons. Understanding the energy difference in the mea-        flat and the structure 1 target, the electron spectra mea-
                                                                                                                                                                              sured positron spectra requires closer evaluation of the      sured at the target normal direction are mutually quite
                                                                                                                                                                              transport PIC simulations that involve the sheath field.      similar, whereas the positron spectra are obviously differ-
                                                                                                                                                                              The comparison of modeled and experimentally mea-             ent, in accord with experimental observations. In Figure
                                                                                                                                                                              sured positron spectra at target normal (laser direction)     4(b) we have also plotted the total electron spectrum
                                                                                                                                                                              is shown in Figure 4(a). The simulated spectra agree          (in MeV−1 ) as the dashed black and red curves. Unlike
                                                                                                                                                                              qualitatively with the experimental data. In Figure 4(b),     the spectra at 0◦ , the total spectrum from structure 1
                                                                                                                                                                              the dark solid curves show the simulated spectra of es-       clearly shows more high energy electrons, which explains
                                                                                                                                                                              caped electrons at 0◦ whereas for comparison the light        the large discrepancy in the positron spectra, as forward
                                                                                                                                                                              solid curves in the background show the corresponding         going positrons are generated by all electrons, not just
                                                                                                                                                                              experimental spectra. Both spectra have a relatively          by the forward going ones.
                                                                                                                                                                              good overlap within the energy range between 40 MeV              There are two acceleration mechanisms that are repon-
                                                                                                                                                                              and 110 MeV. At lower energy, the mismatch is expected        sible for the highest energy electrons, including the loop-
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5

                                                                                                                                                                              injected direct acceleration29 which is associated with         of the sheath field. The images at r = 0 indicate that
                                                                                                                                                                              any targets having moderate scale length preplasma, and         passes of electrons gradually build up the sheath field on
                                                                                                                                                                              the structure-guided direct laser acceleration which oc-        the target backside. Comparing the integrated voltage
                                                                                                                                                                              curs only with the structured target18,19 . We have also        for flat and structured targets, both the voltage at r =
                                                                                                                                                                              found strong Weibel instabilities30 near the critical den-      0 and the average voltage for the structured target are
                                                                                                                                                                              sity surface for both target types which largely widens the     about 10 MV higher than that for flat target, which is
                                                                                                                                                                              electron divergence. This effect was dominating so that         consistent with the measured energy difference between
                                                                                                                                                                              the usual collimating effect associated with the front sur-     their positron peaks.
                                                                                                                                                                              face micro-wires described in previous work18,19 did not           The two-stage PIC simulation reproduced the experi-
                                                                                                                                                                              show up in the electron spectrum measured at at 0◦ .            mental results, suggesting its potential for further target
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              structure optimization to control the yield and energy of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              positrons and other secondary particles, such as ions that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              are also greatly influenced by the sheath field. Optimal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              target parameters will vary substantially with laser pulse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              length, intensity, focal spot size, and the amount of pre-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              pulse. As we have shown, for a given laser condition, the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              structures can be optimized by performing 2D Cartesian
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LPI simulations and converting the electron distributions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              to cylindrical coordinates. After the conversion, the hot
                                                PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0038222




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              electron temperature and the laser-to-electron conversion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              efficiency can both be realistic metrics for estimating the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              positron yield. We plan to probe a broader parameter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              space in future work.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 In summary, front surface target structures have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              been shown experimentally to substantially enhance the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              positron yield and energy, constitiuting a cost-effective




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            29 November 2024 02:28:26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              approach to use laser-generated positron sources for lab-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              oratory astrophysics applications. The follow-up simula-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tions explain the entire process of how the laser-plasma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              interaction that is manipulated by the target structure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              affects the yield and energy of positrons. The agree-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ment between the simulated and experimental spectra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              indicates the possibility of further target optimization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              using two-stage PIC simulations.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


                                                                                                                                                                              FIG. 5. (a1), (b1) Sheath field Ez at r = 0 as a function          We thank the OMEGA EP team for laser opera-
                                                                                                                                                                              of time and longitudinal position z. (a2), (b2) correspond-     tion and technical support. This work was performed
                                                                                                                                                                              ing voltage calculated by integrating Ez over z. (a3), (b3)     under the auspices of the U.S. DOE by LLNL under
                                                                                                                                                                              Average Ez over the back surface of the target. (a4), (b4)      Contract DEAC5207NA27344, and funded by LDRD
                                                                                                                                                                              corresponding voltage by integrating the average Ez . Here      (#17ERD010). The fabrication of Si microwire ar-
                                                                                                                                                                              column (a) is for flat target and column (b) is for optimally   rays was supported through the Office of Science of
                                                                                                                                                                              structured target.                                              the U.S. Department of Energy under Award No.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DE- SC0004993. Additional support for this work
                                                                                                                                                                                 The energy of positrons is largely determined by the         was provided by the Lockheed Martin Corporation
                                                                                                                                                                              sheath field on the back side of the target. Figure 5           (Award 4103810021). We thank the staff at the Kavli
                                                                                                                                                                              shows the evolution of the sheath field Ez as a function        Nanoscience Institute at Caltech for their technical as-
                                                                                                                                                                              of the longitudinal position z and time t. Column (a) are       sistance with fabrication.
                                                                                                                                                                              the results from the flat target and column (b) are from
                                                                                                                                                                              structure 1. Images (a1),(b1) and (a3),(b3) show the Ez
                                                                                                                                                                              field at r=0 and average Ez field over the 1 mm diameter
                                                                                                                                                                              disk respectively, whereas (a2), (b2) and (a4), (b4) are        DATA AVAILABILITY
                                                                                                                                                                              the corresponding voltages V calculatedR by integrating
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          z
                                                                                                                                                                              Ez over the longitudinal distance z. V = zo Ez dz, where          The data that support the findings of this study are
                                                                                                                                                                              z0 = 1 mm indicates the back surface of the target. These       available from the corresponding author upon reasonable
                                                                                                                                                                              plots allow for an estimate of the accelerating capability      request.
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6

                                                                                                                                                                               1 T. Piran, Rev. Mod. Phys. 76, 1143 (2005).                           17 H. Bethe and W. Heitler, Proc. Royal Soc. of London A 146, 83
                                                                                                                                                                               2 H. Chen, D. D. Meyerhofer, S. C. Wilks, R. Cauble, F. Dollar,          (1934).
                                                                                                                                                                                 K. Falk, G. Gregori, A. Hazi, E. I. Moses, C. D. Murphy, et al.,     18 S. Jiang, L. Ji, H. Audesirk, K. George, J. Snyder, A. Krygier,

                                                                                                                                                                                 High Energy Density Physics 7, 225 (2011).                              P. Poole, C. Willis, R. Daskalova, E. Chowdhury, et al., Phys.
                                                                                                                                                                               3 E. Liang, T. Clarke, A. Henderson, W. Fu, W. Lo, D. Taylor,             Rev. Lett. 116, 085002 (2016).
                                                                                                                                                                                 P. Chaguine, S. Zhou, Y. Hua, X. Cen, et al., Sci. Report 5,         19 S. Jiang, A. G. Krygier, D. W. Schumacher, K. U. Akli,        and
                                                                                                                                                                                 13968 (2015).                                                           R. R. Freeman, Phys. Rev. E 89, 013106 (2014).
                                                                                                                                                                               4 G. Sarri, K. Poder, J. M. Cole, W. Schumaker, A. D. Piazza,          20 S. Jiang, A. G. Krygier, D. W. Schumacher, K. U. Akli, and

                                                                                                                                                                                 B. Reville, T. Dzelzainis, D. Doria, L. A. Gizzi, G. Grittani,          R. R. Freeman, Eur. Phys. J. D 68, 283 (2014).
                                                                                                                                                                                 et al., Nat. Comm. 6, 6747 (2015).                                   21 C. Thoma, D. R. Welch, R. E. Clark, D. V. Rose, and I. E.
                                                                                                                                                                               5 M. Stoneking, T. S. Pedersen, P. Helander, E. V. Stenson, U. Her-       Golovkin, Phys. Plasmas 24, 062707 (2017).
                                                                                                                                                                                 genhahn, H. Saitoh, J. Horn-Stanja, J. R. Danielson, and C. M.       22 E. L. Warren, H. A. Atwater, and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem.

                                                                                                                                                                                 Surko, “A new frontier in laboratory physics: electron-positron         C 118, 747 (2014).
                                                                                                                                                                                 plasmas,” To be published.                                           23 M. Henry, C. Welch, and A. Scherer, J. Vac. Sc. Technol. A 27,
                                                                                                                                                                               6 J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 82, 664 (1951).                                1211 (2009).
                                                                                                                                                                               7 G. Breit and J. A. Wheeler, Phys. Rev. 46, 1087 (1934).              24 C. Dorrer, A. Consentino, D. Irwin, J. Qiao, and J. D. Zuegel,
                                                                                                                                                                               8 A. R. Bell and J. G. Kirk, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 200403 (2008).         J. Opt. 17, 094007 (2015).
                                                                                                                                                                               9 C. P. Ridgers, C. S. Brady, R. Duclous, J. G. Kirk, K. Bennett,      25 M. M. Marinak, G. D. Kerbel, N. A. Gentile, O. Jones, D. Munro,

                                                                                                                                                                                 T. D. Arber, A. P. L. Robinson, and A. R. Bell, Phys. Rev. Lett.        S. Pollaine, T. R. Dittrich, and S. W. Haan., Phys. Plasmas 8
                                                                                                                                                                                 165006, 108 (2012).                                                     (2001).
                                                                                                                                                                              10 G. Sarri, W. Schumaker, A. D. Piazza, M. Vargas, B. Dromey,          26 T. Bartal, M. E. Foord, C. Bellei, M. H. Key, K. A. Flippo,

                                                                                                                                                                                 M. E. Dieckmann, V. Chvykov, A. Maksimchuk, V. Yanovsky,                S. A. Gaillard, D. T. Offermann, P. K. Patel, L. C. Jarrott, D. P.
                                                                                                                                                                                 Z. H. He, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 255002 (2003).                  Higginson, et al., nature phys. 8, 139 (2011).
                                                PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0038222




                                                                                                                                                                              11 H. Chen, S. C. Wilks, D. D. Meyerhofer, J. Bonlie, C. D. Chen,       27 H. Sawada, D. P. Higginson, A. Link, T. Ma, S. C. Wilks, H. S.

                                                                                                                                                                                 S. N. Chen, C. Courtois, L. Elberson, G. Gregori, W. Kruer,             McLean, F. Perez, P. K. Patel, and F. N. Beg, Phys. Plasmas
                                                                                                                                                                                 et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 015003 (2010).                            19, 103108 (2012).
                                                                                                                                                                              12 H. Chen, G. Fiksel, D. Barnak, P.-Y. Chang, R. F. Heeter,            28 Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory. Group X-6. MCNP : a Gen-

                                                                                                                                                                                 A. Link, and D. D. Meyerhofer, Phys. Plasmas 21, 040703                 eral Monte Carlo Code for Neutron and Photon Transport. Los
                                                                                                                                                                                 (2014).                                                                 Alamos, N.M. : [Springfield, Va.] :Dept. of Energy, Los Alamos
                                                                                                                                                                              13 H. Chen, F. Fiuza, A. Link, A. Hazi, M. Hill, D. Hoarty, S. James,      Scientific Laboratory ; [for sale by the National Technical Infor-
                                                                                                                                                                                 S. Kerr, D. D. Meyerhofer, J. Myatt, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 114,      mation Service], 1979.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              29 November 2024 02:28:26
                                                                                                                                                                                 215001 (2015).                                                       29 A. G. Krygier, D. W. Schumacher, and R. R. Freeman, Phys.
                                                                                                                                                                              14 T. Xu, B. Shen, J. Xu, S. Li, Y. Yu, J. Li, X. Lu, C. Wang,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Plasmas 21, 023112 (2014).
                                                                                                                                                                                 X. Wang, X. Liang, et al., Phys. Plasmas 23, 033109 (2016).          30 Y. Sentoku, K. Mima, S. Kojima, and H. Ruhl, Phys. Plasmas
                                                                                                                                                                              15 G. J. Williams, D. Barnak, G. Fiksel, A. Hazi, S. Kerr,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7, 689 (2000).
                                                                                                                                                                                 C. Krauland, A. Link, M. J.-E. Manuel, S. R. Nagel, J. Park,
                                                                                                                                                                                 et al., Phys. Plasmas 23, 123109 (2016).
                                                                                                                                                                              16 Y. Yan, Y. Wu, J. Chen, M. Yu, K. Dong, and Y. Gu, Plasma

                                                                                                                                                                                 Phys. Control. Fusion 59, 045015 (2017).
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
                                                PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0038222




                                                                          29 November 2024 02:28:26
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
                                                PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0038222




                                                                          29 November 2024 02:28:26
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
                                                PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0038222




                                                                          29 November 2024 02:28:26
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
                                                PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0038222




                                                                          29 November 2024 02:28:26
This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset.
                                                PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0038222




                                                                          29 November 2024 02:28:26
