Discrete exact and quasi-resonances of Rossby/drift waves on
β-plane with periodic boundary conditions
A. Kartashov♯ , E. Kartashova∗

arXiv:1307.8272v1 [physics.flu-dyn] 31 Jul 2013

♯
∗

AMS, Waidhofen an Ibbs, Austria and

Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria

Abstract
Analysis of resonance clustering in weakly nonlinear dispersive wave systems, also called discrete
wave turbulent systems, is a new methodology successfully used in the last years for characterizing
energy transport due to exact and quasi-resonances. Quite recently this methodology has been
used in the paper by M. D. Bustamante, U. Hayat ”Complete classification of discrete resonant
Rossby/drift wave triads on periodic domains”, [1], in order to show that resonance clustering
is very sparse and quasi-resonances (that is, resonances with small enough detuning) play major
role in the energy transport in this specific wave system. On the other hand, in the paper by M.
Yamada, T. Yoneda ”Resonant interaction of Rossby waves in two-dimensional flow on β-plane”,
[2], the same physical system is studied and a mathematically rigorous theorem is proven: at high
β, the flow dynamics is governed exclusively by resonant interactions. In our present paper we
demonstrate that this seeming contradiction between numerical results [1] and analytical results
[2] are due to some pitfalls in numerical studies of exact and quasi-resonances presented in [1]. We
also demonstrate that resonance clustering of drift waves on periodic β-plane differs substantially
from characteristic resonance clustering in other 3-wave systems: instead of a usual set of isolated
triads and a few bigger clusters, there exists no isolated triads in this case. Resonant triads are
interconnected in a complicated way and the smallest cluster consists of 6 connected triads and
is formed by 6 distinct modes only. This specific clustering is due to the form of the dispersion
function which allows in the general case 12 symmetries; this yields a special mechanism of energy
confinement by exact resonant modes which is lacking in other presently known three wave systems
and even in the system of drift waves with other boundary conditions.

∗

Electronic address: alexkart1@gmx.at,Elena.Kartaschova@jku.at

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

Importance of studying resonances and quasi-resonances in weakly nonlinear dispersive
wave systems is due to the fact that, if nonlinearity is small enough, they describe complete
dynamics of a wave system. Mathematical formalism in this case can be presented as follows
(in this paper we restrict ourselves to three wave systems, for more details and four wave
systems see [3]).
Regard a wave system governed by an evolutionary nonlinear partial differential equation
with a small nonlinearity
L(ϕ) = −εN(ϕ)

(1)

where L is a linear operator such that
L(ψ) = 0, ψ = A exp [i(x · k − ω · t)], A = const,

(2)

N is an arbitrary nonlinearity and 0 < ε ≪ 1 is a small parameter. Then three wave
resonance conditions have the form
ω1 ± ω2 ± ω3 = 0, k1 ± k2 ± k3 = 0,

(3)

and amplitudes of the resonantly interacting waves Aj , j = 1, 2, 3, are not constant anymore
but are slowly changing functions of a new variable - the so-called slow time T = t/ε.
Dispersion relation ω = ω(k) is defined by (2) and the form of boundary conditions.
The use of any multi-scale method, [4], allows us to deduce dynamical equations for
amplitudes Aj (T ) of three resonantly interacting waves which have a simple form in canonical
variables Bj (T )
Ḃ1 = V123 B3 B2∗ , Ḃ2 = V123 B1∗ B3 , Ḃ3 = −V123 B1 B2 ,

(4)

for an arbitrary three wave system encountered in fluid mechanics, geophysics, plasma
physics, astronomy, etc. Here the notation Ḃj is used for dBj /dT.
The difference between all these physically different phenomena is hidden in the form
of the interaction coefficient V123 depending on the initial equation (1), chosen solution of
resonance conditions (3) and form of dispersion function ω(k). If the interaction coefficient
ivanishes, V123 = 0 for a chosen solution of (3), this solution is dynamically not relevant and

2

can be omitted. Accordingly, resonance conditions should be supplemented by the condition
of non-vanishing interaction coefficient,
V123 6= 0.

(5)

The choice of canonical variables Bj (T ) allows to characterize dynamics in terms of one
coefficient V123 but the Bj (T ) are some functions of physical wave amplitudes Aj . Dynamical
system on amplitudes Aj has three different interaction coefficients satisfying some additional
condition (examples are given in [3]).
Study of nonlinear PDEs with periodic boundary conditions makes it necessary to look
for the solutions of (3),(5) in integers. Since centuries the search for integer or rational points
of manifolds or elliptic curves was and still is an open mathematical problem. Accordingly
in early 1960s two mathematical objects have been mainly studied in weakly nonlinear
wave systems: (a) an isolated resonant triad, and (b) an infinite number of interconnected
resonant triads. The approach (b) allows to smooth out dynamics of distinct modes and to
obtain - instead instead of an infinite number interconnected dynamical systems - one wave
kinetic equation at the time scale t/ε2 ; the kinetic equation is studied in the frame of kinetic
wave turbulence theory, [5], which is outside the scope of present paper.
The approach(a) allows to describe dynamics of distinct resonantly interacting modes on
time scale t/ε. In this case, for a chosen wave vector its resonance curve has been usually
constructed which is the locus of pairs of wavevectors interacting resonantly with a given
wavevector ko . For instance, resonance curves for two dimensional drift waves on the β-plane
can be found in [6] where it has been shown that depending on the choice of ko the locus
might be an ellipse, might be shaped like an hour-glass or degenerate into two intersecting
lines. However, there is no general method for finding integer points of a resonance curve
or manifold (3), or at least to establish whether they exist. Example is given in [8] of a
three wave system - capillary water waves with periodic boundary conditions - where exact
resonances are absent. To prove this fact analytically, the frequency resonance condition
for this case has been reduced to the Last Fermat theorem xp + y p = z p with p = 3 which
demonstrates variety of problems which might be accounted for while looking for integer
points on resonant manifolds.
A novel method of representing the complete set of resonant triads in a finite spectral
domain as a set of resonant clusters consisting of one isolated triad or a few triads having
3

common modes has been developed and applied in early 1990s, [7–10], though the notion
of ”resonance cluster” has been first introduced in 2007, [11]. Complete methodology used
to compute a set of resonance clusters, the corresponding set of dynamical systems and to
describe energy percolation in the Fourier space via resonance triads can be found in [3]. This
methodology has been successfully used to clarify numerous results of numerical simulations
and laboratory experiments, and also to model real physical phenomenon - intra-seasonal
oscillations in the Earth atmosphere, [11].
In the present paper we apply these methods to construct and to study resonance clustering based on data kindly provided to us by M. D. Bustamante and U. Hayat, [1], and by
M. Yamada and T. Yoneda, [2], and results of our own simulations.
Our paper has the following structure. In Sec.II we give a brief overview of results on
resonance clustering available for the Charney-Hasegawa-Mima equation (CHME) in various
bounded domains. In particular we demonstrate that ”complete classification of resonant
triads” constructed in [1] is not only incomplete but in fact misleading. Indeed, it can easily
be shown analytically that the smallest resonance cluster in the CHME on the β-plane with
periodic boundary conditions is not an isolated triad as it is stated in [1] but a cluster of 6
connected triads which suggests completely different physical implications.
In Sec.III we explicate the construction of quasi-resonant triads given in [1] and show
why this is grossly incomplete and statistically biased.
In Sec.IV we propose another approach to the problem of constructing resonance clustering and give an outline of our algorithm, based on the notion of resonant curves, introduced
for this case as early as in 1967 in [6]. This algorithm has cubic computational complexity, T = O(L3 ), which results in quite realistic computation time (according to preliminary
tests on a computer comparable to one used in [1] estimated as a few hours to a few days,
depending on implementation details) and has the evident advantage of finding all exact
solutions of the three wave kinematic resonant conditions. We also show how a modification
of this algorithm can be used to find all quasi-resonant solutions for a given detuning level.
Brief discussion in Sec.V concludes the paper.

4

II.

RESONANT TRIADS

The CHME on a sphere with rigid lid (also called barotropic vorticity equation) describes
large-scale processes in the Earth’s atmosphere and has been studied by many researchers
starting with [12]; other classical geophysical references can be found in the monograph [13].
Hamiltonian formalism for atmospheric Rossby waves has been first presented in [14].
In the context of resonance clustering a few main points of reference on spherical
drift/Rossby waves are: [15] (conditions for non-vanishing of the interaction coefficient),
[7] (the first resonance clustering found in the spectral domain |m|, |n| ≤ 50), [21] (a fast

numerical algorithm which allows to compute exact resonances in domains of |m|, |n| ∼ 106 ),

[22] (study of energy percolation in the domain |m|, |n| ≤ 106 ), [11] (a phenomenon of intra-

seasonal oscillations in the Earth atmosphere is interpreted via dynamics of isolated resonant
triads of spherical Rossby modes). Dispersion function in this case has the form
ω(m, n)atm = −2m/[n(n + 1)].

(6)

The CHME on the β-plane used in geophysics to describe large-scale quasi-geostrophic
motions in a barotropic rectangular ocean [0, Lx ] × [0, Ly ] of constant depth with a rigid lid.
In this case the CHME takes the form
∂ψ
∂ 2
▽ ψ + J(ψ, ▽2 ψ) + β
= 0,
∂t
∂x

(7)

and should be solved with non-flow boundary conditions: ψ = 0 for x = 0, Lx and y = 0, Ly .
Here β is the derivative of the Coriolis parameter with respect to latitude, in geophysics
β ≈ 0.127. Computation of nteraction coefficients, an algorithm for computing resonance
clustering in large spectral domains, and examples of clustering are given in [23], [24] and
[25] correspondingly. Dispersion function in this case has the form
√
ω(m, n)ocean = −β/[2π m2 + n2 ].

(8)

In both cases - the CHME on a sphere and on the β-plane with zero boundary conditions
- the characteristic properties of resonance clustering are similar to every other three wave
system studied before: not more than 20÷30%% of all modes participate in exact resonances
and most resonant clusters are isolated triads. As dynamical system for an isolated triad
is integrable, this means that at the time scale t/ε corresponding resonant modes evolve
5

periodically while non-resonant modes just keep their energy (see e.g. Fig.1 and Fig.2, [10],
spherical modes in full numerical spectral model of the CHME).
The CHME with periodic boundary conditions on the β-plane is one of the most famous
equations in plasma physics describing drift waves in tokamak. It was first written out
in the pioneering paper of Hasegawa and Mima, [16], in 1978, and later generalized by
Wacatani and Hasegawa in [17]. Further developments are recently reviewed in [18, 19] and
in monograph [20].
The resonance clustering presented in [1] for this case and dispersion function of the form
ω(m, n)plasma = −βm/(m2 + n2 )

(9)

has the same characteristic structure as in the geophysical examples given above. However,
for this specific case it is rigorously proven that at high β, flow dynamics is governed exclusively by resonant interactions, [2]. This result suggests that resonance clustering can not
be so sparse as in the other three wave system, and this was our motivation to study more
closely the method of computing resonances is given in [1].
Finding (exact) resonant triads (which are described by a Diophantine equation) has
been reduced in [1] to finding rational points on a certain class of elliptic curves. Elliptic
curves and, specifically, their rational points, have at least for a century been one of the
favorite objects of study in algebra and number theory, and a vast literature on them exists.
However, finding all rational points of an elliptic curve is still an open question and the
results of the paper fall short of the claim of ”complete classification” suggested by the title.
To estimate the number of omitted triads in the resonance set computed by this method,
we used the complete set of resonant modes in the spectral domain |m|, |n| ≤ 1000, kindly
provided by Michio Yamada and Tsuyoshi Yoned, [2].
The set includes all the modes with both coordinates within square box of size L = 1000,
i.e. |m|, |n| ≤ 1000 which participate in some resonance triad (their triad partners probably
lying outside the L-box). As we are interested in the study of resonant triads, the first
task was to convert the list of resonant modes into a list of resonant triads, all three modes
of which lie within a given L-box. In the present study we limit ourselves to the domain
L = 200. This is enough to draw well-founded conclusions on the frequency of resonance
occurrence and structure of more common resonance clusters; we also wanted to enable
comparability to the results of [1], where the same problem has been dealt with by other
6

methods.
Having a list of all resonant modes in some domain, the method of reconstruction triads
in that domain is quite straightforward, though some implementation details are a little
tricky. Truncation of modes’ list to L = 200 is trivial. Now consider the set of all pairs
of modes from the truncated list and treat them as the first two modes m1 , n1 , n2 , m2 of
a (possible) resonant triad. The third mode of each triad is uniquely constructed via the
linear conditions, i.e. m3 = m1 + m2 , n3 = n1 + n2 . First we discard those triads whose third
mode lies outside of our box, |m3 | ≥ 200 or |n3 | ≥ 200. For all other triads the resonance
condition should be checked. This can be computed either in integers or in floating-point
numbers (called ”real” everywhere below). Calculation in integers always gives the precise
answer, while dealing with real numbers can produce a small computational error. However
the problem with integers is, that direct calculation leads to dealing with numbers up to the
order of 3 × 1010 , which lies outside the ”long integer” range of usual computers.
This being the case, we chose the following reasonable compromise. We compute the
resonance condition ω1 + ω2 − ω3 = 0 in reals. For most resonant triples it holds exactly,
while some show a small deviation (computation error artefact ). Also for some non-resonant
triples this condition holds up to a very small deviation (quasi-resonant triads). Now we
order the list of triads by their deviation ascending and truncate the list at some deviation
ǫ large enough not to discard any resonant triad, say ǫ = 10−8 . Triads with zero deviation
are immediately placed into resonant triads’ list, while the rest must be checked precisely,
i.e. in integers. We have developed techniques for dealing with ”oversized” integers before,
[21], and it can be used here with some minor alterations.
This method is, however, rather cumbersome, involving computation of quite a few GCDs
(greatest common divisors) of large numbers so for efficiency reasons we did not apply it to
the whole set of candidate triads.
We obtain a set of N = 828 (versus 133 shown in Fig.2, [1], for the same spectral domain
|m|, |n| ≤ 200) resonant triads and our next goal is to study its structure. (Here and below
all results are given for triads with non-zero interaction coefficient.) The bulk data is shown
in the Table I and it can be seen immediately that unlike the examples discussed above,
resonant triads in this case are densely entangled: there are no isolated triads at all. The
total number of clusters is 72, including 40 clusters consisting of 6 interconnected triads.
An example of a cluster of six triads which is the smallest cluster size in the whole set is
7

Number of triads in a cluster 6 12 18 24 30
Number of clusters

40 12 12 2 6

TABLE I: Overall data on the form and number of resonance clusters in the domain |m|, |n| ≤ 200.

given below:



(−18, 46), (2, 22), (−16, 68),







(−18, 46), (16, −68), (−2, −22),






(−16, 68), (−2, −22), (−18, 46),

(10)



(−16, 68), (18, −46), (2, 22),







(−2, −22), (18, −46), (16, −68),






(2, 22), (16, −68), (18, −46).

Each triad of this cluster is connected to four others, having one common mode with two
triads and two common modes (an edge) with two others. The standard (plane) topological
representation of this cluster is shown in Fig.1; it allows to reconstruct the corresponding
dynamical system, [29], and to characterize the type of energy percolation within the cluster,
[30].
It can be checked by direct substitution into resonance conditions (3) with dispersion
function (9) that
Any resonant triad (m1 , n1 ), (m2 , n2 ), (m3 , n3 ) participates in a cluster of 6 connected
triads. There also exists a conjugate cluster of 6 triads, generically not connected with the
first but consisting of modes with same coordinates, up to some sign changes.
In particular, the 6-triad cluster which is conjugate to (10) consists of:



(−18, −46), (2, −22), (−16, −68),







(−18, −46), (16, 68), (−2, 22),






(−16, −68), (−2, 22), (−18, −46),


(−16, −68), (18, 46), (2, −22),







(−2, 22), (18, 46), (16, 68),






(2, −22), (16, 68), (18, 46).
8

(11)

FIG. 1: Color online. Topological structure of a 6-triad cluster (10); resonant triads are shown as
colored triangles, the white triangle in the middle does not represent a resonant triad.

This means that a sixtuple of triads - and not an isolated triad - is the primary building block of the cluster structure for drift/Rossby waves with periodic nonzero boundary
conditions on the β-plane.
Symmetries demonstarated above are best understood in terms of group action on a set.
Our triads lie in the Z6 = {m1 , n1 , m2 , n2 , m3 , n3 } space on the 4-dimensional hyperplane
defined by linear conditions
k1 ± k2 ± k3 = 0.

(12)

On this hyperplane a finite symmetry group of order 12 maps every generic triad on twelve
triads with equal detuning δ. In particular, a triad with detuning zero (resonant) is mapped
on twelve resonant triads which are combined into two clusters of six triads each.

III.

QUASI-RESONANT TRIADS

Conditions for a quasi-resonance read
|ω1 ± ω2 ± ω3 | = δ, k1 ± k2 ± k3 = 0,
9

(13)

with some small 0 < δ ≪ 1 which is called resonance width or frequency mismatch or
detuning etc.
Quasi-resonances take place at some later time-scale than exact resonances and if they are
relevant for the dynamics of a specific wave system depends on the system. As it was mentioned before, in the CHM equation with big enough β quasi-resonances can be disregarded.
On the other hand, in [27] Rossby waves with forcing are regarded and it is shown that for
moderate Rossby number β ≈ 0.1, a reduced numerical model including near-resonances
enables efficient energy transfer from three-dimensional forced modes to two-dimensional
large-scale modes. Another example can be found in [28] where three classes of resonances
between surface and interfacial waves are regarded in a two-layer density-stratified fluid. It
is shown that resonances of the class III (two surface waves and one interfacial wave travel
in the same direction, and the interfacial wave has typically a much longer wavelength compared to the two surface waves) ”undergoes a cascade of (near-)resonance interaction that
spreads the energy of initial waves to a number of lower and higher harmonics”. Resonance
conditions in this case are written in terms of two different dispersion functions - one for
surface waves, ωS , and one for interfacial waves, ωI (see also resonant curves in Fig.1, [28]).
The importance of quasi-resonances is shown then analytically and numerically by studying
the corresponding dynamical equations.
Not going into more detail about the role of quasi-resonances in three wave systems,
we would like to stress once more a very important point: whether quasi-resonances are
important in some specific physical problem, can not be decided from pure kinematic considerations or by analogy. This problem can only be investigated in the frame of reduced
dynamical models, e.g. [27, 28], or by studying an initial NPDE, e.g. [2].
As in some problem settings depending on the choices of NPDE(s), boundary conditions,
number of space dimensions, choice of parameters, etc., it may happen that quasi-resonances’
play an important part in the energy transport in a three-wave system, and a good numerical
algorithm for studying quasi-resonances would be welcome.
However, the algorithm presented in [1] for computing quasi-resonances will not generate
a representative set of quasi-resonances for a very simple reason. This algorithm is looking
for quasi-resonances which are formed in the δ-vicinity of an exact resonant triad, while
conditions (13) are more general and can be satisfied by three wave vectors such that none
of them is a resonant mode and the triad lies far away from any resonant triad. More
10

FIG. 2: Color online. Histograms of quasi-resonances, number of triads for detuning order, for
triads in the nearest vicinity of exact resonant triads (left panel) and for the same number of
randomly chosen triads (right panel)

precisely, we introduce distance between two triads in the usual way, i.e. as Euclidean
distance between 6-vectors:
D([(m1 , n1 )(m2 , n2 )(m3 , n3 )], [(m′1 , n′1 )(m′2 , n′2 )(m′3 , n′3 )]) =
p
(m1 − m′1 )2 + (n1 − n′1 )2 + ... + (n3 − n′3 )2 .

(14)

It is evident that for adjacent triads T1 , T2 , i.e. such triads, whose corresponding nodes lie
√
on the same or adjacent nodes of the 2D integer grid Z2 , D(T1 , T2 ) ≤ 6. Let us compare
short-range and long-range search of quasi-resonances.
For short-range search, we take each exact resonance triad and vary the coordinates of
its three modes, either leaving a coordinate as it is or changing it by ±1. This (taking
into account linear conditions) gives us up to 20 adjacent near-resonant triads for each
11

FIG. 3: Color online. Left panel: Histogram for quasi-resonances found via full search in the
domain L = 200. Right panel: Quasi-resonant triads with very small detunings (horizontal axis),
and their Euclidean distance (vertical axis) from the nearest exactly resonant triad.

exact resonance triad (a few less for triads with coordinates on the border of the L-box).
Altogether 65576 triads have been tested. The smallest detuning value found is εs ≈ 6 · 10−7
and histogram of detuning distribution is shown in Fig.2 (left panel). For each triad T of
√
this set the distance to the nearest resonant triad Dres (T ) is ≤ 6 ∼ 2.45.
We perform long-range search taking two first points at random and constructing the
third according to linear conditions. The triad is accepted in the test pool if the third point
lies within the L-box and non of the six coordinates is equal to zero.
We take as many random triads as have been tested for the short-range search (this
number is fixed). Results of a typical run (these vary slightly from run to run, of course,
due to random choice of triads) are presented in the same figure (right panel).
We immediately see that seeking for quasi-resonances in the vicinity of exact resonances
has hardly any advantage over random choice.
Now to the full search. Testing all triads in the domain L = 200, we find much better
quasi-resonances (triads with much smaller detunings) than either through short-range or
random search. Their histogram is shown in the next figure (left pane). A striking peculiarity of these quasi-resonances is, that none of them lie anywhere near a precise resonant
12

triad. The scatter graph of distances to the nearest exact triad (in the sense of (14) against
detunings (same figure, right panel) shows that triads with smallest detunings lie no nearer
to precise resonances than D = 15, and sometimes over 70 (each point of the scatter graph
corresponds to multiple triads due to symmetries discussed above).
One may argue that the search for quasi-resonances in some small vicinity of an exact
resonance might work for a special initial distribution of the energy in the wave field - energy
should be initially distributed only among exact resonant modes and at least in some triad(s)
high-frequency modes have to be excited, but this should be explicitly discussed as it is done
e.g. in [10, 30].
However, even under suitable assumptions about initial energy distribution, the algorithm for seeking quasi-resonances presented in [1] has a few critical flaws demonstrated and
discussed below.
The

construction

starts

with

some

irreducible

(exact)

resonant

triad

(m1 , m1 ), (m2 , n2 )(m3 , n3 ) having at least one wavevector outside the L-box, |mi | > L or
|mi | > L, say the greatest wave number m1 = cL, c > 1 and rational. This triad is then
scaled to fit into the box. In plain words, we consider the triad
(m1 /c, n1 /c)(m2 /c, n2 /c)(m3 /c, n3 /c)

(15)

for which the resonance equations hold precisely, all wavenumbers lie within the L-box - but
some of them are not integer any more.
Now consider all the triads with integer wavenumbers which lie in the 1-vicinity of the
scaled triad: we just round mi , li to the next integer value, up or down. In the general
case we obtain 64 triads, some of them probably sufficing the linear conditions m1 + m2 =
m3 , n1 + n2 = n3 . From the latter we choose the triad with the smallest detuning and call
it quasi-resonant.
In this way, starting with a single irreducible triad outside the box, we construct up to
L quasi-resonant triads. (For some values of L it can happen that none of the 64 candidate
triads suffice the linear constraints.) This process is repeated for every irreducible triad
outside the box, and it is assumed that ”the higher the box norm the smaller the size of the
corresponding detuning level ”. (p.2409, [1]).
This implies no less than that detuning value grows monotonously as the box size declines.
However, this statement is not only unjustified, it is simply not true. Closely following the
13

FIG. 4:

Color online.

Detuning as a function of the box-size L.

For the triad

[{2, −49}{190, 155}{192, 106}] detuning in shown for box sizes L = 100, 99...1 (on the left) and
for L = 100, 99...80 (on the right)

construction of the authors, we wrote a program which calculates detuning as a function
of the shrinked box size and presents it graphically (available online, [26]). Example of the
detuning function is shown in the Fig.4. Indeed, we could not find a single triad for which
the assumption cited would hold.
The consequences of this error are near disastrous for the study of quasi-resonant triads
presented in the [1]. As an example, let us consider the triad
(2, −49)(190, 155)(192, 106)

(16)

taken from Fig.1, [1]. Choosing detuning level of 1.0 × 10−4, we obtain quasi-resonant triads
for box sizes L = 100, 99...91. For L = 90 detunig is approximately 1.07 × 10−4 , so under
the assumption of monotonous growth of detuning here we break off. But as detuning is not
monotonous, there are four box sizes L = 89, 88, 87, 83 which fall into the chosen detuning
range but are ignored by the construction proposed. This does not only reduce the number
of near-resonant triads constructed but also introduces a systematical bias - triads with
smaller wave numbers are ignored more often than those with larger ones - rendering further
considerations on them (both statistical and structural) virtually worthless.
14

FIG. 5: Color online. Graphical presentation of using resonant curves for fast computing exact
and quasi-resonances (see Sec.IV).
IV.

AN ALTERNATIVE APPROACH

For every mode m1 , n1 within the box we should find all ”partner” modes (m2 , n2 ) which
would give rise to a resonant triad. A brute force approach - testing all modes within the
box - would give computational complexity O(L4 ) which is unreasonably large. However
we make use of the fact that partner modes lie on a continuous smooth curve without selfintersections, called resonance curve and constructed in [6] (and some properties of such
curves used below can be found there), and our task is reduced to finding integer points on
this curve (if any). (For some special cases this curve degenerates into a couple of intersecting
straight lines and finding integer points on them is quite easy.)
Step 1.

Initial choice of (m1 , n1 ) and (m2 , n2 ).

We start with some triad T =

[(m1 , n1 )(m2 , n2 )(m3 , n3 )] within the box which gives an exact resonance. We insert the
triad as the first member of the list of solutions. If we regard the wavevector m1 , n1 as fixed
and k2 , l2 as variable with (m2 , n2 ) real and within the box (|m2 |, |n2 | ≤ L), exact resonances
will lie on the resonance curve of (m1 , n1 ), from which parts may be cut off by the box sides.
It is of crucial importance that detunings on two sides of the curve (in the real space) have
different signs.

15

Step 2. Check the resonance curve for integer points starting from a given integer point.
By construction, the curve has at least one integer point (m2 , n2 ). We calculate detunings
for the point’s neighbors in clockwise order:
p0 = (m2 + 1, n2 ), p1 = (m2 + 1, n2 + 1), ..., p7 = (m2 + 1, n2 − 1)

(17)

and encounter one of the following possibilies:
2.0. We encounter a point with detuning zero, i.e. another resonant triad. We add it to
the solution list and perform Step 2 for this point.
2.1. (The general case.) Detunings of two consequtive points (pi , pi+1 ), i = 1...7 checked
have different signs. (Here the index i lies in Z8 , so that the pair p7 , p0 does not fall out
of consideration.) There lies a point of the resonance curve on the interval [pi , pi+1 ]. One
coordinate of this point is the common coordinate of the pair (every pair has one coordinate
in common, of course) and the other coordinate is not integer.
2.2. Some neighbor points fall outside the L-box. Follow the border of the box until the
next sign change (wchich signals the retun of the curve into the box), then follow the curve
into the box in the manner described above.
These steps are iterated until we reach a point already visited before. For each vector {m1 , n1 } its resonant curve is treated in O(L) steps, which amounts to O(L3 ) overall
computation time. Moreover, the point couples constructed above, between which the detuning function changes its sign, produce a set of quasi-resonances much larger than just
the immediate neighbors of exact resonant triads usually used.
In terms of resonant curves, quasi-resonances with detuning values under some limit ε
are integer box points belonging to some vicinity of the curve. Let us introduce the notion
of detuning surface, considering detuning as function of (m2 , n2 ) for fixed (m1 , n1 ) with
(m2 , n2 ) ∈ R. The algorithm outlined above actually does somewhat more than just find all
integer solutions of the equations in question: for every resonant curve it also lists all integer
points of the box that are its 1-neighbors. A subset of them represents quasi-resonances. If
this subset is not empty, we should check their immediate neighbors on the grid, and if some
of them suffice quasi-resonance conditions, check their neighbors etc., until at some step no
new quasi-resonance points are found. Simple properties of resonance curves and detuning
surfaces allow us to prove that this search is exhaustive, i.e. all quasi-resonances will be
found through this procedure. Moreover, as for each new quasi-resonance point found at
16

some intermediate step we check only O(1) ≤ 8 its neighbors, computational complexity is
linear with respect to the number of quasi-resonances.

V.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

In this paper we have studied exact and quasi-resonances of two-dimensional Rossby/drift
waves on the b-plane with periodic boundary conditions. This problem has been recently
investigated by two group of researchers and the results obtained proved to be in a drastic
contradiction.
Theoretical investigation presented in [2] in the form of a strict mathematical theorem
results in the statement that for big enough β flow dynamics is governed exclusively by
resonant interactions, while quasi-resonances can be omitted. On the other hand, numerical
study of exact and quasi-resonances of two-dimensional Rossby/drift waves on the b-plane
with periodic boundary conditions performed on the base of ”complete classification of
discrete resonant Rossby/drift wave triads”, [1], states something very different. Namely,
the resonance clustering is sparse, most of resonance clusters consist of one isolated triad or
two connected triads, and the role of quasi-resonances in the energy transfer is crucial.
Being thus motivated to resolve this mystery, we performed a new study of resonance
clustering for this case. Our results can be briefly formulated as follows.
We performed comparative study of the data sets (resonance triads, [1], and resonant
modes, [2]) kindly provided by the authors of both papers. Comparison have been performed
in the spectral domain |m|, |n| ≤ 200 while corresponding resonant clustering is presented in
the Fig.2, [1]. It turned out that algorithm developed in [1] for computing exact resonances
produces only a small part of all solutions - about 15% of all solutions in the chosen domain
- and gives completely wrong resonance clustering. Instead of sparse clustering consisting
mostly of isolated triads, we have established that no isolated resonant triads exist for this
case. The smallest resonance cluster consists of 6 triads connected in a complicated way
(shown in Fig.1). This sixtuple of triads plays the role of a basic building block for resonance
clustering in this case which is quite different from the other three wave systems studied
previously, where indeed isolated triads play this role, [3]. We assume that specifics of
this resonance clustering yields a special mechanism of energy confinement by clusters of
exact resonant modes which lacks in the other three wave systems presently known and
17

even in the system of drift waves with other boundary conditions. Discussion of possible
physical implications and analytical study of the dynamical system for a sixtuple of triads
is forthcoming.
We have also established that an algorithm for computing quasi-resonances presented in
[1] is grossly incomplete and statistically biased while based on the incorrect assumption that
detuning value grows monotonously as the box size declines. This algorithm does not only
reduce the number of near-resonant triads constructed but also introduces a systematical
bias - triads with smaller wave numbers are ignored more often than those with larger
ones - rendering further considerations on them (both statistical and structural) virtually
worthless.
We programmed this algorithm and checked this assumption for a few dozen arbitrary
triads. We could not find a single triad for which this assumption holds, example of computation presented in Fig.4. Our software is free available for on-line computation, [26].
Another problem with this algorithm is that it looks for the triads with a small frequency
detuning in a vicinity of an exact discrete resonant triad. However, as it follows from the
Thue-Siegel-Roth theorem and has also been demonstrated for other wave systems, [31],
in this case the frequency detuning has a lower boundary and can not be arbitrary small.
Accordingly, the smallest detuning found in [1] in the vicinity of an exact resonance is of
the order of 10−5 .
However, one has to realize that the definition of a quasi-resonance (13) does not require
that one or two modes were part of some exact resonant triad. Full search in the domain
L = 200 renders detunings of the order of 10−11 . In accordance with the Thue-Siegel-Roth
theorem, the smallest detunings are found in the quasi-resonant triads whose distance to
the nearest exact resonant is very big (the smallest detuning ∼ 8.95 · 10−12, distance ∼ 21.7,
second best detuning ∼ 9 · 10−12 , distance ∼ 44 etc.).
We presented a detailed sketch of an algorithm for computing exact resonances for periodic Rossby/drift waves on the β-plane based on the notion of resonant curves introduced in
[6]. This algorithm has cubic computational complexity, T = O(L3 ), which results in quite
realistic computation time (according to preliminary tests on a computer comparable to one
used in [1] estimated as a few hours to a few days, depending on implementation details)
and has the evident advantage of finding all exact solutions of the three wave kinematic
resonant conditions. We also showed how a modification of this algorithm can be used to
18

find all quasi-resonant solutions lying in a close vicinity of exact resonances.
It is a pity the authors of [1] did not give details about the laptop they used for their
numerical studies. For some reason the authors performed full search only in the region
L = 100, considering full search in larger regions (including one of the main objects of the
study - the L = 200 domain) unfeasible. For the sake of fair play we performed full search
(”brute force”) on the oldest laptop at hand and still running (1.66 GHz single processor, 2
GB RAM, 32 bit system). The region L = 200 was ready in 22 minutes (the list of solutions
coincides with data of M. Yamada and T. Yoneda, [2]), and we see no reason to apply the
heuristic algorithm developed in [1], losing some 84% of exact solutions (695 from 828) and
seven magnitudes of quasi-resonance detuning (10−5 versus 10−12 ) to this domain, or at least
perform a comparison between the algorithm proposed and full search.
Remark. Of course we performed full search with a few evident shortcuts, like computing
all ω-s and storing them in a 200 × 200 array, as well as taking into account the symmetry
group of order 12 mentioned above.
Acknowledgements. The authors are very much obliged to M. D. Bustamante and
U. Hayat, and to M. Yamada and T. Yoneda, for supplying their data sets for our study.
AK acknowledges support of AMS, Waidhofen an Ibbs, Austria. EK acknowledges P. Diamond, Ö. Gurcan, A. Smolyakov and other participants of the 7th Festival de The`’orie
”Reduced models of complex plasma dynamics” (8–26 July 2013, Aix-en-Provence, France)
for interesting discussions and most useful comments. This research has been supported by
the Austrian Science Foundation (FWF) under projects P22943-N18 and and P24671.

[1] M. Bustamante, U. Hayat. Complete classification of discrete resonant Rossby/drift wave
triads on periodic domains. Commun. Nonlinear Sci. Numer. Simulat, 18 (2013): 2402–2419.
[2] Michio Yamada, Tsuyoshi Yoned. Resonant interaction of Rossby waves in two-dimensional
flow on a β-plane Physica D 245 (2013): 1-7.
[3] E. Kartashova. Nonlinear Resonance Analysis (Cambridge University Press, 2010)
[4] A. H. Nayfeh. Introduction to Perturbation Techniques (Wiley-Interscience, NY, 1981).
[5] V. E. Zakharov, V. S. L’vov and G. Falkovich. Kolmogorov Spectra of Turbulence (Series in
Nonlinear Dynamics, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1992).

19

[6] M. S. Longuet-Higgins, and A. E. Gill. Resonant interactions between planetary waves. Proc.
Roy. Soc. Lond., A299 (1967): 120–40.
[7] E. A. Kartashova, L. I. Piterbarg and G. M. Reznik. Weakly nonlinear interactions between
Rossby waves on a sphere. Oceanology, 29 (1990): 405–11.
[8] E. Kartashova. Partitioning of ensembles of weakly interacting dispersing waves in resonators
into disjoint classes. Physica D, 46 (1990): 43–56.
[9] E. Kartashova. On properties of weakly nonlinear wave interactions in resonators. Physica D,
54 (1991): 125–34.
[10] E. Kartashova. Weakly nonlinear theory of finite-size effects in resonators. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
72 (1994): 2013–16.
[11] E. Kartashova and V. S. L’vov. A model of intra-seasonal oscillations in the Earth atmosphere.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 98 (2007): 198501-1–4.
[12] J. G. Charney. The dynamics of long waves in a baroclinic westerly current J. Metheorology,
4 (1947): 135–162.
[13] J. Pedlosky. Geophysical Fluid Dynamics (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1987).
[14] L. I. Piterbarg. Hamiltonian formalism for Rossby waves. In Nonlinear Waves and Weak
Turbulence, ed. V.E. Zakharov (AMS Trans. 2, 1998), 131–66.
[15] I. Silberman. Planetary waves in atmosphere. Meteorology 11 (1954): 27–34.
[16] A. Hasegawa, K. Mima. Pseudo-three-dimensional turbulence in magnatized nonuniform
plasma. Phys. Fluids 21 (1) (1978): 87–92.
[17] M. Wakatani, A. Hasegawa. A collisional drift wave description of plasma edge turbulence.
Phys. Fluids 27 (3) (1984): 611–18.
[18] P. H. Diamond, S.-I. Itoh, K. Itoh, T.S. Hahm. Zonal flows in plasma - a review. Plasms
Phys. Control Fusion 47 (2005), R35–R161.
[19] P. H. Diamond, A. Hasegawa, K. Mima. Vorticity dynamics, drift wave turbulence and zonal
flows: a look back and a look ahead. Plasms Phys. Control Fusion 53 (2011), 124001.
[20] P. H. Diamond, S.-I. Itoh, K. Itoh. Modern Plasma Physics (Cambridge University Press,
2010).
[21] E. Kartashova and A. Kartashov. Laminated wave turbulence: generic algorithms III. Physica
A: Stat. Mech. Appl., 380 (2007), 66-74.
[22] L’vov, V. S. , A. Pomyalov, I. Procaccia, and O. Rudenko. Finite-Dimensional Turbulence of

20

Planetary Waves. Phys. Rev. E. 80 (2009): 066319.
[23] E. A. Kartashova and G. M. Reznik. Interactions between Rossby waves in bounded regions.
Oceanology, 31 (1992): 385–89.
[24] E. Kartashova and A. Kartashov. Laminated wave turbulence: generic algorithms I. Int. J.
Mod. Phys. C, 17 (2006): 1579–96.
[25] E. Kartashova, C. Raab, Ch. Feurer, G. Mayrhofer and W. Schreiner. Symbolic computations
for nonlinear wave resonances. In Extreme Ocean Waves, ed. E. Pelinovsky and Ch. Kharif
(Springer, 2008), pp. 97–128.
[26] A. Kartashov. Software for computing quasi-resonances according to the algorithm given in
[1]: http : //www.dynamics − approx.jku.at/portal/?q = node/144 (30 July, 2013)
[27] Smith LM, Lee Y. On near resonances and symmetry breaking in forced rotating flows at
moderate Rossby number. J. Fluid. Mech. 535 (2005): 111—42.
[28] Alam M-R. A new triad resonance between co-propagating surface and interfacial waves. J.
Fluid. Mech. 691 (2012): 267—78.
[29] E. Kartashova and G. Mayrhofer. Cluster formation in mesoscopic systems. Physica A: Stat.
Mech. Appl., 385 (2007): 527–42.
[30] E. Kartashova and V. S. L’vov. Cluster dynamics of planetary waves. Europhys. Lett., 83
(2008): 50012-1–6.
[31] E. Kartashova. Exact and quasi-resonances in discrete water-wave turbulence. Phys. Rev.
Lett., 98 (2007): 214502-1–4.

21

