Fluctuating interfaces in barotropic beta-plane turbulence
Sandip Sahoo∗ and Samriddhi Sankar Ray†

arXiv:2507.23493v1 [physics.flu-dyn] 31 Jul 2025

International Centre for Theoretical Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bangalore 560089, India
(Dated: August 1, 2025)
Zonal jets manifest themselves as bands with sharp interfaces in the vorticity configuration. We
develop an algorithm to track these fluctuating vorticity interfaces and systematically investigate
their characteristic spatio-temporal behavior. While the interfacial height fluctuations are typically
sub-Gaussian, the corresponding fluctuation speeds exhibit wider, heavy-tailed distributions reflecting the influence of lateral dispersion induced by the zonal velocity profile along the interfacial
contours. The temporal evolution of these fluctuations is further characterized through their power
spectrum displaying scale invariance in the frequency domain. The sharp, dense, shock-like features
present in the time series of the height field suggest a possible lacking of differentiability. We confirm this by calculating the moments of the time-increments of the interfacial height fluctuations.
Finally, the fractal nature of these boundaries is investigated systematically through a multifractal
approach, revealing the non-trivial, complex statistics of interfaces in such geophysical, turbulent
flows.

Fully developed turbulent flows are commonly seen in
nature and industry. Quite often, studies in turbulence
rely on assumptions of homogeneity and isotropy, which
is still a valid approximation for a large number of phenomena. Importantly, the framework of fully developed,
statistically homogeneous and isotropic turbulence—
starting with the seminal work of Kolmogorov in 1941—
remains the cornerstone in our understanding of the
mathematical and statistical physics structure of high
Reynolds number flows [1]. This is especially true as
many of the tools of statistical physics, used to address
such fundamental questions as the universality of intermittency and anomalous scaling, rest on such notions of
(statistical) isotropy and homogeneity [2].
Nevertheless, there are several instances of turbulent
flows in nature where the lack of statistical isotropy or
homogeneity is apparent. The most striking natural examples of such turbulence are zonal flows, commonly observed in several planetary atmospheres as well as in terrestrial oceans [3–5]. They are also a common feature
of strongly magnetised plasmas in tokamaks and solar
tachocline [6–8]. Zonal flows—with characteristic, distinct, banded, jet-like structures (see Fig. 1(b) for a representative plot)—in geophysical systems emerge from an
interplay of the Coriolis force and the inherent turbulence
driven by the high Reynolds numbers typical of these systems [9, 10]. Perhaps the most striking manifestations of
such flows and their characteristic banded structure are
observed in the Jovian atmosphere as well as in most
of the outer planets such as Saturn, Uranus and Neptune [5, 11–13].
On Earth, such zonal turbulent flows have immediate consequences. The Coriolis force acting on atmospheric circulation gives rise to alternating jets of easterlies and westerlies moving anti-parallel to each other [14–
16], which become apparent only after time-averaging.

∗ sandipsahoo09902@gmail.com
† samriddhisankarray@gmail.com

The number and width of such jets depend, in a nontrivial way, on the strength of the Coriolis force and the
degree of turbulence as measured through its Reynolds
number. While similar zonal jets are present in the
oceans, they tend to be less prominent than their atmospheric counterparts due to the relatively lower levels
of turbulence [17–23].
All of this suggests not just the ubiquity of zonal turbulence in nature, but significantly its importance in
the context of geophysics—particularly in understanding
large scale phenomena related to the oceans and the atmosphere. Therefore, rightly, the focus over the past few
decades has been in both understanding and modeling
the barotropic quasi-geostrophic turbulence — the associated instabilities and formation of jets — and what it
implies for atmospheric and oceanic patterns and circulation [24–26]. A statistical mechanical approach serves
as a powerful framework for analyzing such flows, and
provides deep insight into the underlying flow behaviors [27]. Interestingly, fluctuations in zonal jets—an
intriguing aspect of these flows—can also be characterized from the viewpoint of statistical physics. These jets
manifest as bands with sharp interfaces in the vorticity
configuration. Observations, both from several numerical simulations and, for example, in images of planetary
flows, indicate that these interfaces—delineating regions
of contrasting vorticity—also undergo significant dynamical fluctuations reminiscent of various physical phenomena. An efficient contour-tracking algorithm developed
below to capture these interfaces suggests that they correspond to the velocity maxima of eastward jets—thus
exhibiting the same characteristic dynamical features as
the jets themselves. Indeed, even within the more limited
context of turbulent or turbulent-like flows, the study of
such fluctuating interfaces have been the subject of a
large body of work in recent times [28–43].
In this paper, we focus on characterising these vorticity interfaces and show, from detailed direct numerical
simulations (DNSs) and an interface tracking algorithm,
how such interfaces are actually multifractactal with non-

2

FIG. 1. Pseudocolor plots of the vorticity fields with the zonostrophy parameter (a) Rβ = 6.3 (β = 10) and (b) Rβ = 7.5
(β = 50). Distinct jets, a key signature of zonal turbulence, are clearly seen which become more prominent for the case of
larger Rβ . A time evolution of these flows, seen in an animation [44], reveal the rich spatio-temporal dynamics of the vorticity
interfaces.

trivial dynamics, non-Gaussian fluctuations while having
fat-tailed distributions in the fluctuations speeds. We also
calculate the moments of the time-increments of the interfacial height, measured from their mean contour, to
find that the temporal evolution is indeed rough. Furthermore, we underline the universal aspects of such interfaces while highlighting their sensitivity to the latitude
at which these observations are made.
Planetary atmospheres and oceans can be considered
as shallow fluid layers which is a consequence of very
large aspect ratio: they have a large horizontal spread
compared to their vertical depth. Hence to unearth the
large-scale dynamics in such systems where spontaneous
jet formation becomes apparent, a useful approximation
is modeling them as a homogeneous layer of fluid on a
sphere [10, 45]. Thus, ignoring stratification, such thin
fluids, at a given latitude θ, lend themselves to a mathematical description in terms of the two-dimensional (2D)
Navier-Stokes equation for the velocity field u subject to
a Coriolis force 2Ω × u with Ω being the angular velocity
of the rotating planet [46–48]. The effect of the Coriolis
force at latitude θ is thus felt only through the vertical
component of planetary vorticity f = 2Ω sin θ.
Two-dimensional fluid layers typically straddle a
meridional distance y around a given latitude θ0 . We
account for this spread, within the so-called β-plane approximation [9], by assuming y to be small. Thus, the
net Coriolis parameter, up to a first-order correction,
is given by f = f0 + βy, where f0 = 2Ω sin θ0 and
0)
β = ∂f
= 2Ω cos(θ
with a being the radius of the
∂y
a
θ0

planet.

With this β plane approximation in place, the simplest model for zonal flows would be a two-dimensional,
barotropic (depth-independent), incompressible NavierStokes equation augmented by the Coriolis parameter [10, 46–48]. Hence, we obtain the equation of motion
for the vorticity ω = ∇2 ψ (where ψ is the stream function) field for such incompressible, 2D planetary flows:
∂ψ
∂ω
+ J(ψ, ω) + β
= ξ − µω + ν∇2 ω;
∂t
∂x

(1)

with the Jacobian J(ψ, ω) ≡ ∂x ψ∂y ω − ∂y ψ∂x ω. Like
for the usual two-dimensional turbulence problem [49–
52], we introduce dissipative terms through the kinematic
viscosity ν and the coefficient of an Ekmann friction µ.
Turbulence is generated and sustained through a large
scale, zero mean but delta-correlated in time, drive ξ
which maintains the flow in a non-equilibrium statistically steady state [45, 53, 54].
We perform direct numerical simulations (DNSs) of
Eq. (1) by using a standard 2/3 de-aliased pseudospectral algorithm on a square periodic domain of length
L = 2π with N 2 collocation points. We use N = 1024
and 2048; our results are consistent across the two system sizes and the results presented are from the larger
simulation. The time evolution is carried out by using a
second-order, exponential Runge-Kutta method [56] with
a time-stepping δt = 0.001. We use a coefficient of friction µ = 10−3 and, in the DNSs for numerical stability,
use a hyperviscous term (instead of the viscous dissipation term in Eq. (1)) (−1)n+1 ν∇2n ω with n = 4 and ν =
10−17 . The zero mean, delta-correlated in time forcing
ξ, applied on narrow-band of wavenumbers [53, 57, 58]

3

FIG. 2. (a) A representative snapshot of the zonal velocity field u(x, y), (b) the corresponding zonally averaged mean vorticity
ω(y) and velocity U (y), and (c) the vorticity field ω(x, y) (like in Fig. 1) for β = 50 (Rβ = 7.5) with the interfacial contours
overlaid on it. The contours C, drawn in red, separating successive shear zones suggest the fluctuating nature of the interfaces
whose rich dynamics is best seen in an animation of the time evolution of the vorticity field [55].

around kf = 32, is chosen to ensure an energy injection
rate ϵ = −⟨ξψ⟩ = 10−4 . Care is also taken to ensure that
no modes are forced which are strictly zonal kf = (0, kf )
or only meridional kf = (kf , 0).
The most critical element in this study is of course
β. The zonal flows, which emerge from solutions of this
two-dimensional, forced-dissipative β-plane system, are
distinct in their pattern which are characterised by alternating bands of thin and thick jets — the easterlies and
westerlies — with alternating signs of velocity. In the
vorticity configuration, these manifest as banded structures with differing vorticities. The number, sharpness,
and indeed the visual representation of such jets depend
on the latitude—with increasing β they proliferate with
sharper interfaces. One useful measure in this context is
the zonostrophy parameter [10]
LRh
1
= √ U 1/2 β 1/10 ϵ−1/5
(2)
Lϵ
2
p
where the Rhines length scale LRh = 2U/β sets the
typical meridional widths of the zonal jets and Lϵ =
1/5
2 ϵ/β 3
marks the scale where transition from the
homogeneous and isotropic turbulence to the one dominated by the Coriolis parameter takes place; U is the
root-mean-square velocity. In our DNSs, we vary β ∈
{10, 20, 30, 40, 50} and cover a range of the zonostrophy
parameter, 6.3 ≤ Rβ ≤ 7.5. Our choice of the zonostrophy parameters is consistent with observations in the gas
giant planets [5].
As an illustrative example of the sensitive dependence
of zonal turbulence on Rβ , in Fig. 1 we present snapshots
of the vorticity field for (a) Rβ = 6.3 (β = 10) and (b)
Rβ = 7.5 (β = 50). Clearly, more distinct interfaces between vorticity shear zones—and hence prominent jets—
form for the flow with the larger Rβ . This is because,
Rβ ≡

as is known from several studies in the past [10, 58–60],
with increasing Rβ a large fraction of the turbulent kinetic energy gets organized within the mean flow which,
in turn makes them stronger compared to the less coherent eddies and ultimately leads to steady jets. Conversely, when Rβ is small, the influence of the eddies
prevail, leading to weaker, highly fluctuating, and often
indistinct zonal jets. This framework accounts for the
pronounced variability of jets in the Earth’s atmosphere
and oceans [61] (where Rβ tends to be small) compared
to the more persistent and robust jets observed in the
atmosphere of gas giant planets [12, 62]. As a result,
the zonostrophy parameter is often used as a measure of
the strength, variability, and fluctuations of the emergent
zonal jets [10, 59].
The spatio-temporal evolution of these banded structures, as shown in our animation of these systems [44]
and already suggestive in Fig. 1, underlines a richness in
the dynamics and fluctuations of the interface between
vorticity shear zones. While the boundaries separating
regions of differing vorticity, as seen in Fig. 1, are visually apparent, identifying them by means of some suitable
measure requires additional effort. Hence we develop an
algorithm, as outlined below, to track the contour C(x, t)
— the interface — marking the boundary between successive shear zones.
The vorticity profile (Fig. 1) consists of banded structures dominated by either positive or negative vortices.
This makes the flow vorticity field ω(x, y, t) a natural choice for identifying the jet boundaries since sharp
transitions are expected at these locations. However,
we find that ω(x, y, t) is not a particularly useful measure because strong fluctuations inherent in the turbulent flow ensure that jumps are hardly discrete. Alternatively, one can examine the zonal velocity profile,

4

FIG. 3. Representative space-time plots (kymograph) of the height field h(x, t) of a particular interface for (a) Rβ = 6.3
(β = 10) and (b) Rβ = 7.5 (β = 50). Clear diagonal banding, more prominent for smaller Rβ show the conjectured lateral
spilling of the height field. (c) The probability density functions (PDF) P of (normalised) h/hσ for different values of Rβ
(= 6.3, 6.9, 7.5) (see legend), while having a Gaussian core (black dashed line), show clear sub-Gaussian tails which become less
pronounced with increasing Rβ .

seen in Fig. 2(a), where these banded structures are also
clearly evident. By plotting the zonally averaged vorRL
ticity ω(y, t) = L1 0 dxω(x, y, t) and zonal mean zonal
RL
velocity U (y, t) = L1 0 dx u(x, y, t) as functions of y at
a fixed time, we observe that near the jet boundaries the
sharp jumps in ω(y, t = t0 ) tend to coincide with the local maxima of U (y, t = t0 ), as illustrated in Fig. 2(b).
This observation motivates the use of the zonal velocity
field u(x, y, t) to identify and analyze the jet interfaces.
It appears that the vorticity interfaces correspond to
the local maxima of u(x, y, t), when plotted as a function
of y at a fixed value of x = X and a given time t = t0 . By
repeating this process over the domain and across different snapshots, we can systematically trace the interfacial
contour C(x, t) spatio-temporally. It is quite remarkable
to notice from an animation [63], how well the contours
obtained by identifying the velocity maxima of eastward
jets tracks the vorticity interfaces spatio-temporally. A
snapshot of the vorticity field with the interfacial contours overlaid as red lines is shown in Fig. 2(c). We refer
the reader to an animation of the vorticity field [55], overlaid with the contours C, which show the intricate details
in the dynamical evolution of vorticity interfaces and how
well our algorithm tracks these fluctuating interfaces.
One of the defining characteristics of these contours is
that they exhibit spatio-temporal oscillations while maintaining their geometric structure. The simplest way to
quantify such fluctuations is by introducing a height field

h(x, t), defined as the deviation of a contour C(x, t) from
its time-averaged profile C(x), i.e.,
h(x, t) = C(x, t) − C(x),

with C(x) =

1
T

Z T
dt C(x, t)
0

(3)
What, then, is the statistics of these interfaces as captured by the height field h(x, t)? The strong east-west
orientation of the zonal velocity field allows the fluctuations to have a tangential component. This is indeed confirmed in our measurements of the height field
and brought out succinctly in the representative kymograph plots for (a)Rβ = 6.3 and (b) Rβ = 7.5 in Fig. 3.
The diagonal bandings, indicative of lateral spreading of
the jet fluctuations, emerge quite convincingly from such
plots. Furthermore, as Rβ increases and the jets become
stronger, this lateral spreading becomes less pronounced,
as is evident from the reduced thickness of the banding
patterns when comparing panels (a) and (b) in Fig. 3.
This lateral spread also hints at the emergence of possible non-Gaussian tails in the probability density function
(PDF) P (h/hσ ), where the height field h is normalised
by its standard deviation hσ . By using 1000 temporally
well-separated and statistically independent snapshots of
the vorticity field, we compute this PDF, as shown in
Fig. 3(c), and observe a Gaussian core accompanied by
clear sub-Gaussian tails which become less pronounced
as Rβ increases. While the numerical evidence for these

5

FIG. 4. (a) Probability density functions (PDF) P of the speed vC of the height field for various Rβ (see legend). The dashedcurves are separate Gaussian fits to each PDF. A representative time-series of the sectoral (b) mean height Mh and (c) variance
Vh fluctuations, for a random sector of an interface, have been shown. Loglog plots of the power spectrum of the (d) mean
dh |2 and (e) variance |V
ch |2 , averaged over all sectors, show clear power-law behaviour indicated by the black lines,
height |M
which seem robust within the range of Rβ considered in this study.

sub-Gaussian tails is compelling, it is hard to understand
from the equations of motion what could be the possible
reasons for such a behaviour.

Such sub-Gaussian tails are less common in measurements in fully developed turbulence. Nevertheless, we
would still expect signatures of fat tails and intermittency
in the velocity of the interface — vC (x, t) = limδt→0 δh/δt
– which ought to be pegged to the underlying zonal
turbulence that result in such dynamics. We begin by
measuring the PDF P (vC ) of the speeds and find that
(Fig. 4(a)), contrary to the height distribution, fluctuations in speed are indeed fat-tailed and reminiscent of
fully developed turbulence. For smaller values of the
zonostrophy parameter, the eddies and the mean flow
compete as discussed earlier resulting in strongly intermittent interfacial velocities. However, as the zonostrophy parameter becomes large, the mean flow dominates
and hence it seems likely that intermittency ought to
weaken. In Fig. 4(a), we find this heuristic argument
to be reasonably accurate with a limiting Gaussian behaviour for the larger Rβ .

We now look at the spatiotemporal properties of h(x, t)
and quantify the timescales of fluctuations. We find it
convenient to address this issue by understanding the sectorial mean and variance of the interface. These sectors
are obtained by segmenting the interfacial contour C(x, t)
into Ns (= 32 for our analysis) bins. Thus the sectoral
mean interfacial height Mh,s (t) and variance Vh,s (t) are
defined as

Mh,s (t) =
Vh,s (t) =

1 X
h(x, t),
Np x∈s

1 X
(h(x, t) − Mh,s (t))2
Np x∈s

(4)

where Np (= N/Ns ) is the number of points in each sector. The temporal statistics is performed on 1000 evenlyspaced time snapshots obtained in the statistically steady
state.
The time series of Mh,s and Vh,s , shown in Fig. 4(b)
and (c) for a representative, random segment, exhibits
large fluctuations which seem to depend, in magnitude,
on the value of Rβ . The time series of Mh,s is strongly
reminiscent of the saw-tooth solutions of the Burgers
equation and suggests that the spectrum of the mean
dh |2 decaying as f −2 at high frequencies f . To
height |M
confirm a possible Burgers-like dynamics, we measure
this spectrum averaged over all Ns sectors and indeed
find a clear f −2 , as shown in Fig 4(d).
The time series of Vh,s , a second-order quantity modelling the interfacial energy, on the other hand, is more
intermittent. Indeed, it is reasonable to expect that the
corresponding frequency spectrum ought to reflect the
energy spectrum, especially for large Rβ , of the underlying turbulent zonal flow which triggers such interfaces.
In Fig 4(e), we show plots of the spectra of the height
ch |2 and find comvariance (averaged over all sectors) |V
pelling evidence of the distinct power law regimes — f −5 ,
f −5/3 , and f −7/2 — characteristic of β-plane turbulence.
Furthermore, this contrasts effectively with the variance
of height fluctuations seen in the arrested growth of in-

6

FIG. 5. (a) A loglog plot of the second-order structure function S2 versus the normalised time τ /τw showing a power-law
regime with an exponent ξ2 , for ττw ≲ 1, as indicated by the dashed line. At short times, the function shows a non-ballistic
behaviour with a Rβ -dependent exponent ζ2 ̸= 2 as shown by the dashed-dotted line. (b) Plots of the generalised dimensions
Dq vs q and (inset) the singularity spectrum f (α) vs α for different values of Rβ .

terfaces marking the separation of binary active fluids
reported recently [37] where the interface provides an effective two-dimensional turbulent annular shell separating the more active fluid from the less active one.
The time-series of the height fluctuations — Mh and
Vh — are suggestive. While they appear self-similar —
confirmed by the power-laws in the corresponding spectrum — the sharp, dense, shock -like features suggest a
possible lacking of differentiability. In particular, while
the intermediate, inertial range statistics may be Hölder
continuous with h < 1, it is not obvious that the height
field h(t) (integrated over space) is smooth and differentiable. In order to test these ideas, we calculate the
second-order structure function of the height field, with
time increments τ conveniently normalised by the Rossby
time-scale τw = 1/Lϵ β ,
 
ζ2

 τ
,
for ττw ≪ 1
τw
2
S2 (τ ) = ⟨[h(t + τ ) − h(t)] ⟩ ∼  ξ2

 τ
,
for ττw ≲ 1
τw
(5)
with the scaling exponent ζ2 = 2 for differentiable,
smooth functions and S2 saturating for τ /τw > 1.
In Fig. 5(a), we plot this second-order temporal structure function, on a log-log scale, for three different values
of Rβ . Clearly there does seem to be an inertial range,
shaded in beige with the dashed black line as a guide to
the eye, with ξ2 ≈ 1.1. Furthermore, the dependence of
this exponent ξ2 on Rβ seems to be mild and the variation insignificant within error bars. At times of the order
of the Rossby time, the second-order structure function
saturates.
But what stands out in Fig. 5(a) is the scaling behaviour when τ /τw ≪ 1. Remarkably, and as anticipated
earlier, ζ2 ̸= 2 underlining the roughness of the tempo-

ral fluctuations of the height field. Furthermore, ζ2 → 2
as Rβ increases. This numerical observation must serve
as a crucial ingredient in future mathematical modelling
through possible stochastic differential equations of the
contour C.
Before we conclude, we make a final characterisation
of the nature of fluctuations to complete our study. A
wide range of numerical and experimental studies has
pointed out that several aspects of fully developed turbulence, such as the turbulent energy dissipation field,
are fractals and are best characterized by a broad range
of self-similar scales [64–66]. As another quantification
of the interface fluctuations, we carry out a multifractal
analysis of the height field [37]. In doing so, we define
the function H(x, y, t) = |h(x, y, t)| + 0.001 (here, 0.001
is added to the absolute value of the height field to make
H(x, y, t) positive definite). Then we follow the same procedure in constructing the partition function of H(x, y, t)
as discussed in many earlier studies [1, 2, 67]. We divide
the interfacial contour into Nl segments of size l (where
Nl = L/l, with L being the domain length in the simulation and l ∈ {20 , 21 , 22 , ..., 211 } points), and find the
coarse-grained height at this scale for each partition, like
Pl(i+1)
for the i–th partition it is given by Hl,i = x=li H(x, y)
where i ∈ [0, Nl − 1]. Then we add powers of different
order q (real) of Hl,i over all segments to get the parPNl −1 q
tition function Zq (l) (≡ i=0
Hl,i ), and the process is
repeated for different values of l. If the height field is
multifractal, we expect Zq (l) to scale with the size of the
partitions l according to some power law. In this context,
the so-called generalized dimensions Dq are defined, such
1

that Zq (l) ∼ l(q−1)Dq . The plots of ln Zqq−1 vs ln l will
have a linear region in the inertial range, whose slope
gives the Dq . For different values of q, we get a distri-

7
bution of Dq vs q. Numerically we obtain the Dq vs q
curve by ensemble averaging Dq over 1000 snapshots of
the interfacial height. From this we arrive at the singularity spectrum fα − α via the Legendre transform of
d
(q − 1)Dq , as α = dq
(q − 1)Dq and fα = αq − (q − 1)Dq .
The distribution of Dq vs q for different values of the
zonostrophy parameter are shown in Fig. 5(a); we see
a more pronounced behavior towards the negative values of q and has a distinctive feature for different Rβ s.
The positive q part of the distribution is almost flat, and
doesn’t vary as Rβ changes. This indicates that lower
magnitudes of the height profile exhibit more of the multiscale fluctuations, while larger deviations are smoother.
Also, as Rβ increases, the fluctuations get smoother resulting in the downward trend of the distribution curve.
The associated fα − α spectrum of singularity strengths
α, shown in Fig. 5(b), exhibits a positively skewed profile with a broad range of α values, indicating that the
fluctuations are characterized by a spectrum of scaling
exponents. Interestingly, as Rβ increases, the degree of
multifractality diminishes. This is also an outcome of the
fact that interface fluctuations are reduced with increasing Rβ . As a result, the interfacial profile gets smoother,
resulting in an overall reduction in the range of α.
In this work, we make a systematic characterization
of the vorticity interfaces which emerge spontaneously
in two-dimensional, barotropic, β-plane turbulence. In
particular, we find that the dynamics of such interfaces
are complex and exhibit multifractal statistics. Given
the importance of zonal flows in particle-laden atmo-

spheric and marine systems, the statistics of such interfaces, which induce a distinctive lateral shear, must
play an important role in the stretching and subsequent
transport of elastic, filamentary pollutants — such as
microplastics — which have been shown to have a preferential (Lagrangian) sampling of the flow [68, 69]. Furthermore, such interfaces may play an important role in
determining coalescence, orientation and aggregation of
sub-Kolmogorov particles [70–72], essentially because we
know how fluid structures determine the fate of collision and coalescence mechanisms in fully developed turbulence [73]. Finally, how such jets influence Lagrangian
intermittency and chaos [74] is left for future work.

[1] U. Frisch, Turbulence: The Legacy of A. N. Kolmogorov
(Cambridge University Press, 1995).
[2] S. Mukherjee, S. D. Murugan, R. Mukherjee, and S. S.
Ray, Turbulent flows are not uniformly multifractal,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 132, 184002 (2024).
[3] K. Kondratyev and G. Hunt, Weather and Climate on
Planets (1st ed. Oxford; Pergamon Press, 1982).
[4] I. de Pater and J. J. Lissauer, Planetary Sciences, 2nd
ed. (Cambridge University Press, 2015).
[5] B. Galperin and P. L. Read, Zonal Jets: Phenomenology, Genesis, and Physics (Cambridge University Press,
2019).
[6] T. E. Stringer, Diffusion in toroidal plasmas with radial
electric field, Phys. Rev. Lett. 22, 770 (1969).
[7] Y. Rozhansky and M. Tendler, Plasma rotation in tokamaks, in Review of Plasma Physics, Vol. 19, edited by
B. B. Kadomtsev (Consultants Bureau, New York, 1996)
p. 147.
[8] P. H. Diamond, S.-I. Itoh, K. Itoh, and T. S. Hahm,
Zonal flows in plasma—a review, Plasma Physics and
Controlled Fusion 47, R35 (2005).
[9] P. B. Rhines, Waves and turbulence on a beta-plane,
Journal of Fluid Mechanics 69, 417–443 (1975).
[10] B. Galperin, S. Sukoriansky, N. Dikovskaya, P. Read,
Y. Yamazaki, and R. Wordsworth, Anisotropic turbulence and zonal jets in rotating flows with a β-effect,

Nonlinear Processes in Geophysics 13, 83 (2006).
[11] S. Bolton, A. Adriani, V. Adumitroaie, M. Allison, J. Anderson, S. Atreya, J. Bloxham, S. Brown, J. Connerney,
E. Dejong, W. Folkner, D. Gautier, D. Grassi, S. Gulkis,
T. Guillot, C. Hansen, W. Hubbard, L. Iess, A. Ingersoll,
and R. Wilson, Jupiter’s interior and deep atmosphere:
The initial pole-to-pole passes with the juno spacecraft,
Science 356, 821 (2017).
[12] P. L. Read, The dynamics of jupiter’s and saturn’s
weather layers: A synthesis after cassini and juno, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 56, 271 (2024).
[13] T. E. Dowling, Jets in planetary atmospheres (2019).
[14] G. Hadley, Concerning the cause of the general tradewinds, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
of London 39, 58 (1735).
[15] J. M. Lewis, Clarifying the Dynamics of the General
Circulation: Phillips’s 1956 Experiment., Bulletin of the
American Meteorological Society 79, 39 (1998).
[16] S. M. Uppala, P. W. KÅllberg, A. J. Simmons, U. Andrae, V. D. C. Bechtold, M. Fiorino, J. K. Gibson,
J. Haseler, A. Hernandez, G. A. Kelly, X. Li, K. Onogi,
S. Saarinen, N. Sokka, R. P. Allan, E. Andersson,
K. Arpe, M. A. Balmaseda, A. C. M. Beljaars, L. V. D.
Berg, J. Bidlot, N. Bormann, S. Caires, F. Chevallier, A. Dethof, M. Dragosavac, M. Fisher, M. Fuentes,
S. Hagemann, E. Hólm, B. J. Hoskins, L. Isaksen, P. A.

We are very grateful to S. Mukherjee and V.
Vasan for several useful discussions and suggestions. S.S.R. acknowledges SERB-DST (India) projects
STR/2021/000023, CRG/2021/002766, and the CEFIPRA Project No 6704-1 for support. This research
was supported in part by the International Centre for
Theoretical Sciences (ICTS) for the programs - Field
Theory and Turbulence (code:ICTS/ftt2023/12), IndoFrench workshop on Classical and quantum dynamics in
out of equilibrium systems (code: ICTS/ifwcqm2024/12)
and 10th Indian Statistical Physics Community Meeting (code: ICTS/10thISPCM2025/04). The simulations
were performed on the ICTS clusters Mario, Tetris, and
Contra. The authors acknowledge the support of the
DAE, Government of India, under projects nos. 12-R&DTFR-5.10-1100 and RTI4001.

8
E. M. Janssen, R. Jenne, A. P. Mcnally, J.-F. Mahfouf,
J.-J. Morcrette, N. A. Rayner, R. W. Saunders, P. Simon, A. Sterl, K. E. Trenberth, A. Untch, D. Vasiljevic,
P. Viterbo, and J. Woollen, The era-40 re-analysis, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 131,
2961 (2005).
[17] S. Sokolov and S. R. Rintoul, Multiple jets of the antarctic circumpolar current south of australia, Journal of
Physical Oceanography 37, 1394 (2007).
[18] P. Berloff, S. Karabasov, J. T. Farrar, and I. Kamenkovich, On latency of multiple zonal jets in the
oceans, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 686, 534–567 (2011).
[19] B. Galperin, H. Nakano, H.-P. Huang, and S. Sukoriansky, The ubiquitous zonal jets in the atmospheres of giant
planets and earth’s oceans, Geophysical Research Letters
31 (2004).
[20] P. Berloff, I. Kamenkovich, and J. Pedlosky, A model of
multiple zonal jets in the oceans: Dynamical and kinematical analysis, Journal of Physical Oceanography 39,
2711 (2009).
[21] N. A. Maximenko, B. Bang, and H. Sasaki, Observational
evidence of alternating zonal jets in the world ocean, Geophysical Research Letters 32 (2005).
[22] N. A. Maximenko, O. V. Melnichenko, P. P. Niiler, and
H. Sasaki, Stationary mesoscale jet-like features in the
ocean, Geophysical Research Letters 35 (2008).
[23] S. Cravatte, E. Kestenare, F. Marin, P. Dutrieux, and
E. Firing, Subthermocline and intermediate zonal currents in the tropical pacific ocean: Paths and vertical
structure, Journal of Physical Oceanography 47, 2305
(2017).
[24] D. Gürcan and P. H. Diamond, Zonal flows and pattern
formation, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical 48, 293001 (2015).
[25] F. Bouchet, C. Nardini, and T. Tangarife, Kinetic theory of jet dynamics in the stochastic barotropic and 2d
navier-stokes equations, Journal of Statistical Physics
153, 572 (2013).
[26] F. Bouchet, J. B. Marston, and T. Tangarife, Fluctuations and large deviations of reynolds stresses in zonal
jet dynamics, Physics of Fluids 30, 015110 (2018).
[27] F. Bouchet and A. Venaille, Statistical mechanics of twodimensional and geophysical flows, Physics Reports 515,
227 (2012), statistical mechanics of two-dimensional and
geophysical flows.
[28] T. Heus and H. J. J. Jonker, Subsiding shells around shallow cumulus clouds, Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences
65, 1003 (2008).
[29] J. Westerweel, C. Fukushima, J. M. Pedersen, and
J. C. R. Hunt, Momentum and scalar transport at the
turbulent/non-turbulent interface of a jet, Journal of
Fluid Mechanics 631, 199 (2009).
[30] K. Chauhan, J. Philip, C. M. De Silva, N. Hutchins, and
I. Marusic, The turbulent/non-turbulent interface and
entrainment in a boundary layer, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 742, 119 (2014).
[31] T. Watanabe, Y. Sakai, K. Nagata, Y. Ito, and T. Hayase,
Turbulent mixing of passive scalar near turbulent and
non-turbulent interface in mixing layers, Physics of Fluids 27 (2015).
[32] G. Borrell and J. Jiménez, Properties of the
turbulent/non-turbulent interface in boundary layers, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 801, 554 (2016).
[33] G. E. Elsinga and C. B. Da Silva, How the turbulent/non-

turbulent interface is different from internal turbulence,
Journal of Fluid Mechanics 866, 216 (2019).
[34] V. Nair, T. Heus, and M. van Reeuwijk, A lagrangian
study of interfaces at the edges of cumulus clouds, Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 78, 2397 (2021).
[35] N. Pal, P. Perlekar, A. Gupta, and R. Pandit, Binaryfluid turbulence: Signatures of multifractal droplet dynamics and dissipation reduction, Physical Review E 93,
063115 (2016).
[36] N. B. Padhan and R. Pandit, Activity-induced droplet
propulsion and multifractality, Physical Review Research
5, L032013 (2023).
[37] S. Mukherjee, K. Kumar, and S. S. Ray, Turbulenceinduced fluctuating interfaces in heterogeneously-active
suspensions (2025), arXiv:2502.16443 [cond-mat.soft].
[38] A. Pocheau, Scale invariance in turbulent front propagation, Physical Review E 49, 1109 (1994).
[39] J. Xin, Front propagation in heterogeneous media, SIAM
review 42, 161 (2000).
[40] C. R. Koudella and Z. Neufeld, Reaction front propagation in a turbulent flow, Physical Review E—Statistical,
Nonlinear, and Soft Matter Physics 70, 026307 (2004).
[41] I. Corwin, The kardar–parisi–zhang equation and universality class, Random matrices: Theory and applications
1, 1130001 (2012).
[42] L. Bentkamp, T. D. Drivas, C. C. Lalescu, and
M. Wilczek, The statistical geometry of material loops
in turbulence, Nature Communications 13, 2088 (2022).
[43] A. Roy, J. R. Picardo, B. Emerson, T. C. Lieuwen, and
R. I. Sujith, Small-scale intermittency of premixed turbulent flames, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 957, A21 (2023).
[44] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=End6Kq4WXn0,
spatio-temporal evolution of interfaces between successive jets.
[45] R. K. Scott and L. M. Polvani, Forced-dissipative
shallow-water turbulence on the sphere and the atmospheric circulation of the giant planets, Journal of the
Atmospheric Sciences 64, 3158 (2007).
[46] G. P. Williams, Planetary circulations: 1. barotropic representation of jovian and terrestrial turbulence, Journal
of Atmospheric Sciences 35, 1399 (1978).
[47] G. K. Vallis and M. E. Maltrud, Generation of mean flows
and jets on a beta plane and over topography, Journal of
Physical Oceanography 23, 1346 (1993).
[48] S. Danilov and D. Gurarie, Scaling, spectra and zonal
jets in beta-plane turbulence, Physics of Fluids 16, 2592
(2004).
[49] D. K. Lilly, Numerical simulation of two-dimensional turbulence, The Physics of Fluids 12, II (1969).
[50] S. Chen, R. E. Ecke, G. L. Eyink, M. Rivera, M. Wan,
and Z. Xiao, Physical mechanism of the two-dimensional
inverse energy cascade, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 084502
(2006).
[51] G. Boffetta and R. E. Ecke, Two-dimensional turbulence,
Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 44, 427 (2012).
[52] S. S. Ray, D. Mitra, P. Perlekar, and R. Pandit, Dynamic
multiscaling in two-dimensional fluid turbulence, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 107, 184503 (2011).
[53] M. E. Maltrud and G. K. Vallis, Energy spectra and coherent structures in forced two-dimensional and betaplane turbulence, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 228,
321–342 (1991).
[54] R. K. Scott and A.-S. Tissier, The generation of zonal
jets by large-scale mixing, Physics of Fluids 24, 126601

9
(2012).
[55] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2245yIifaFY,
spatio-temporal evolution of the contour marking the
interfaces between successive jets.
[56] S. M. Cox and P. C. Matthews, Exponential time differencing for stiff systems, Journal of Computational
Physics 176, 430 (2002).
[57] K. Srinivasan and W. Young, Zonostrophic instability,
Journal of Atmospheric Sciences 69, 1633 (2012).
[58] L. Cope, The Dynamics of Geophysical and Astrophysical Turbulence, Ph.D. thesis, Apollo - University of Cambridge Repository (2020).
[59] S. Sukoriansky, N. Dikovskaya, and B. Galperin, On the
arrest of inverse energy cascade and the rhines scale,
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 64, 3312 (2007).
[60] R. K. Scott and D. G. Dritschel, The structure of zonal
jets in geostrophic turbulence, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 711, 576–598 (2012).
[61] I. Kamenkovich, P. Berloff, and J. Pedlosky, Role of eddy
forcing in the dynamics of multiple zonal jets in a model
of the north atlantic, Journal of Physical Oceanography
39, 1361 (2009).
[62] B. Galperin, R. Young, S. Sukoriansky, N. Dikovskaya,
P. Read, A. Lancaster, and D. Armstrong, Cassini observations reveal a regime of zonostrophic macroturbulence
on jupiter, Icarus 229, 295–320 (2014).
[63] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UN2rWx1r4Yk,
spatio-temporal evolution of the contours obtained by
identifying the velocity maxima of eastward jets tracks
the vorticity interfaces.
[64] K. R. Sreenivasan and C. Meneveau, The fractal facets
of turbulence, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 173, 357–386

(1986).
[65] C. Meneveau and K. R. Sreenivasan, Simple multifractal
cascade model for fully developed turbulence, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 59, 1424 (1987).
[66] C. Meneveau and K. R. Sreenivasan, The multifractal
nature of turbulent energy dissipation, Journal of Fluid
Mechanics 224, 429–484 (1991).
[67] C. Meneveau and K. R. Sreenivasan, The multifractal
spectrum of the dissipation field in turbulent flows, Nuclear Physics B - Proceedings Supplements 2, 49 (1987).
[68] J. R. Picardo, D. Vincenzi, N. Pal, and S. S. Ray, Preferential sampling of elastic chains in turbulent flows, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 121, 244501 (2018).
[69] J. R. Picardo, R. Singh, S. S. Ray, and D. Vincenzi, Dynamics of a long chain in turbulent flows: impact of vortices, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A:
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 378,
20190405 (2020).
[70] J. Bec, S. Musacchio, and S. S. Ray, Sticky elastic collisions, Phys. Rev. E 87, 063013 (2013).
[71] J. Bec, S. S. Ray, E. W. Saw, and H. Homann, Abrupt
growth of large aggregates by correlated coalescences in
turbulent flow, Phys. Rev. E 93, 031102 (2016).
[72] P. Anand, S. S. Ray, and G. Subramanian, Orientation
dynamics of sedimenting anisotropic particles in turbulence, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 034501 (2020).
[73] J. R. Picardo, L. Agasthya, R. Govindarajan, and S. S.
Ray, Flow structures govern particle collisions in turbulence, Phys. Rev. Fluids 4, 032601 (2019).
[74] S. S. Ray, Non-intermittent turbulence: Lagrangian
chaos and irreversibility, Phys. Rev. Fluids 3, 072601
(2018).

