Nonperturbative Quantum Gravity

arXiv:1203.3591v1 [hep-th] 15 Mar 2012

J. Ambjørn a , A. Görlich b , J. Jurkiewicz b and R. Loll c,d
a

The Niels Bohr Institute, Copenhagen University
Blegdamsvej 17, DK-2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark.
email: ambjorn@nbi.dk
b

Institute of Physics, Jagellonian University,
Reymonta 4, PL 30-059 Krakow, Poland.
email: atg@th.if.uj.edu.pl, jurkiewicz@th.if.uj.edu.pl
c

Institute for Theoretical Physics, Utrecht University,
Leuvenlaan 4, NL-3584 CE Utrecht, The Netherlands.
email: r.loll@uu.nl
d

Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics,
31 Caroline St. N., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada N2L 2Y5.
email: rloll@perimeterinstitute.ca

Abstract
Asymptotic safety describes a scenario in which general relativity can be quantized as a conventional field theory, despite being nonrenormalizable when expanding
it around a fixed background geometry. It is formulated in the framework of the
Wilsonian renormalization group and relies crucially on the existence of an ultraviolet fixed point, for which evidence has been found using renormalization group
equations in the continuum.
“Causal Dynamical Triangulations” (CDT) is a concrete research program to
obtain a nonperturbative quantum field theory of gravity via a lattice regularization,
and represented as a sum over spacetime histories. In the Wilsonian spirit one can
use this formulation to try to locate fixed points of the lattice theory and thereby
provide independent, nonperturbative evidence for the existence of a UV fixed point.
We describe the formalism of CDT, its phase diagram, possible fixed points and
the “quantum geometries” which emerge in the different phases. We also argue
that the formalism may be able to describe a more general class of Hořava-Lifshitz
gravitational models.

1

1

Introduction

An unsolved problem in theoretical physics is how to reconcile the classical theory
of general relativity with quantum mechanics. Consider the gravitational theory
defined by the Einstein-Hilbert action, plus possible matter terms. Trying to quantize the fluctuations around a given solution to the classical equations of motion
one discovers that the corresponding quantum field theory is perturbatively nonrenormalizable. Part of the problem is that in spacetime dimension four the mass
dimension of the gravitational coupling constant G is −2 in units where ~ = 1 and
c = 1. As a result, conventional perturbative quantum field theory is expected to
be applicable only for energies
E 2 ≪ 1/G.
(1)
Despite being a perfectly good assumption in all experimental situations we can
imagine in the laboratory, this relation can be taken as an indication that something
“new” has to happen at sufficiently large energies or, equivalently, short distances.
If one believes in a fundamental quantum theory of gravity, one would usually read
the breakdown of perturbation theory when (1) is no longer satisfied as signaling the
appearance of new degrees of freedom as part of a different theory, which is valid at
higher energies. A well-known example of this is the electroweak theory, which was
described originally by a four-fermion interaction. The latter is not renormalizable
and perturbation theory breaks down at sufficiently high energy, namely, when the
energy E no longer satisfies (1), with the gravitational coupling constant G replaced
by the coupling GF of the four-Fermi interaction, which also has mass dimension
−2. The breakdown coincides with the appearance of new degrees of freedom, the
W - and Z-particles. At the same time, the four-Fermi interaction becomes just an
approximation to the process where a fermion interacts via W and Z particles with
other fermions. The corresponding electroweak theory is renormalizable.
Similarly, in the 1960s a model for the scattering of low-energy pions was proposed, the so-called non-linear sigma model. It is again nonrenormalizable, with
a coupling constant of mass dimension −2 when the model is formulated in four
(one time and three space) dimensions. Also in this case the model did not describe
adequately the scattering data at high energy. Nowadays we understand that this
happened because the pions cannot be viewed as elementary particles, but are made
of quarks and anti-quarks. Again, the correct underlying theory of these quarks,
anti-quarks and gluons is a renormalizable quantum field theory.

1.1

What to do about gravity?

For the case of gravity there seems to be no simple way of extending it to a renormalizable quantum field theory by either adding new fields, like in the electroweak
theory, or by introducing new fields in terms of which the theory becomes renormalizable, as in the case of the nonlinear sigma model. It may be possible that this can
be done for gravity too, but so far we have not discovered how.
2

There have been alternative proposals which share some of the flavour of the
above “resolutions” of nonrenormalizable theories. String theory is an example of a
framework which tries to get around the problem of gravity as a nonrenormalizable
quantum field theory by adding new degrees of freedom, albeit infinitely many. The
ambition of string theory in the 1980s was that of a “theory of everything”, unifying
gravity and all matter fields in a single theoretical framework. One problem with
this is that one got much more than was asked for, including many unobserved
particles, symmetries and spatial dimensions. Another problem is that it has never
been entirely clear what kind of theory one is dealing with. Best understood is
the perturbative expansion around flat ten-dimensional spacetime, but a genuinely
nonperturbative definition of string theory is still missing. This renders the role of (a
possibly emergent notion of) space, not to mention time, in string theory somewhat
unclear. The world we observe today is not a simple, obvious consequence of the
dynamics of string theory. With our present understanding of string theory one has
to work hard to extract from it something which even vaguely resembles the world
we can observe. The incompleteness of this understanding prevents us moreover
from making any predictions for our universe. String theory clearly is a versatile
and fascinating theoretical framework, but it is hard to tell whether it is the right
one for describing the real world (including quantum gravity), or merely a modern
incarnation of epicycles, with sufficiently many free (moduli) parameters to describe
anything purely kinematically, but providing no insights into the dynamics which
governs nature.
Loop quantum gravity represents another bold attempt to circumvent the nonrenormalizability of quantum gravity. It does so by adopting a nonstandard procedure of quantization where the Hilbert space of states is nonseparable and the
holonomies of connections, viewed as quantum objects, are finite. It is perhaps too
early to tell whether this program will be successful in its attempts to quantize
four-dimensional gravity, solve all UV problems and provide us with a semiclassical
limit which coincides with Einstein gravity in the limit ~ → 0.

1.2

Searching for fixed points

A much more mundane approach to quantum gravity, going back to S. Weinberg and
known as “asymptotic safety” [1] is inspired by the Wilsonian renormalization group.
The key idea is that while a perturbative expansion around a fixed background
geometry leads to a nonrenormalizable theory, this merely reflects the infrared end
of a renormalization group flow, which originates from a genuinely nonperturbative
UV fixed point governing the short-distance physics of quantum gravity. Asymptotic
safety refers to the assumption that such an ultraviolet fixed point exists and in its
neighbourhood the co-dimension of the critical surface associated with it is finite.
As a consequence one only has to adjust a finite number of coupling constants to
reach the critical surface, where the physics is identical to that of the UV fixed point.
In the abstract coupling-constant space where all possible interactions are allowed,
3

the couplings which need to be adjusted to reach the critical surface are called
relevant couplings. In this sense the concept of asymptotic safety is a generalization
of the concept of a renormalizable field theory. For renormalizable four-dimensional
field theories the fixed point is Gaussian. This implies that the scaling dimension
of the fields when approaching the fixed point is just the canonical dimension of
the field as it appears in the classical Lagrangian. The above-mentioned finite codimension of the critical surface associated with such a Gaussian fixed point is equal
to the number of independent polynomials one can form in terms of the fields and
their derivatives, such that the coupling constants of the corresponding terms in an
action have negative (canonical) mass dimension (in units where c = ~ = 1). For
marginal couplings, where the canonical dimension is zero, one needs to calculate
the corrections to the canonical dimensions near the fixed point to decide whether
they are relevant or irrelevant (or stay marginal). The difficulty one faces in the
asymptotic safety scenario is that the fixed point is not Gaussian and standard
perturbation theory may tell us little or nothing about its existence, let alone the
physics associated with the fixed point if it exists.
Do we have reliable methods to check for the existence of a non-Gaussian fixed
point? To start with, not too many non-Gaussian fixed points are known outside of
two spacetime dimensions (which is very special) and involving only bosonic fields1 ,
with one exception, the Wilson-Fisher fixed point of three-dimensional Euclidean
scalar field theory. It plays an important role in nature since it governs the critical
behaviour of many materials. It is nonperturbative, and its existence and associated properties have been analyzed in the 4-ε expansion, the 2+ε expansion, by an
“exact renormalization group” analysis and by other methods, leading to a general
agreement on the values of its critical exponents. This means that we can analyze
meaningfully a nonperturbative fixed point in quantum field theory in spacetime dimensions larger than two. Unfortunately, the fixed point needed in four-dimensional
quantum gravity is different from the Wilson-Fisher one. First, it is a UV fixed
point, while the Wilson-Fisher fixed point is in the infrared. Second, and maybe
more importantly, the Wilson-Fisher fixed point is located entirely within the set
of renormalizable three-dimensional quantum field theories in the sense that it can
be viewed as a non-trivial fixed point of a φ4 -field theory. There is a renormalization group flow from a Gaussian UV fixed point to the Wilson-Fisher IR fixed
point, while there is no other known ultraviolte fixed point in the general class of
1

The situation looks somewhat better when one considers supersymmetric quantum field theories. Both in three and four dimensions there exist a number of conformal supersymmetric theories
which are candidates for fixed points of a larger class of supersymmetric field theories. The cancellation of the leading UV divergences imposed by supersymmetry seems to bring the situation
closer to the two-dimensional case where quantum fluctuations are not necessarily breaking the
conformal invariance one expects at the fixed point. Recently there has been significant progress
in implementing supersymmetric theories on the lattice [2], and one may eventually be able to
study the detailed approach to the conformal supersymmetric fixed points in the same detail as
one can currently study bosonic lattice theories. In the present review we will be mainly interested
in purely bosonic theories.

4

three-dimensional scalar field theories.
The major issue one has to address when applying the 2+ε expansion or the
exact renormalization group equations to four-dimensional quantum gravity is how
reliable these methods are, since both rely on truncations. When originally proposing asymptotic safety, Weinberg referred to the 2+ε expansion as an example of
an expansion which suggested that there could be a nontrivial fixed point. This
was corroborated later by Kawai and collaborators [3], but the problem obviously
remains that in spcaetime dimension four the expansion parameter ε = 2 is no
longer small. More recently, starting with the seminal paper of Reuter [4], there has
been major progress in applying exact renormalization group techniques to quantum
gravity [5]. The calculations reported so far point to the existence of a nontrivial
fixed point, with additional evidence that one only has a finite number (three) of
relevant coupling constants associated with it, as required by the asymptotic safety
scenario. However, we will not attempt here to evaluate how reliable this evidence
for asymptotic safety is.

1.3

Putting gravity on the lattice (correctly)

In this review article we will present another attempt to construct a theory of quantum gravity nonperturbatively, namely, by defining a nonperturbative quantum field
theory of gravity as a sum over spacetime geometries. To make the sum well defined we introduce a UV cutoff via a spacetime lattice. Under the assumption that
the asymptotic safety scenario is valid, our task is to search systematically for a
fixed point by changing the bare coupling constants in the lattice action. If such a
fixed point is found, we must investigate whether it qualifies as a UV fixed point for
quantum gravity. This should enable us to make contact with the asymptotic safety
scenario and exact renormalization group calculations.
However, the approach we will be pursuing is more general. In case the asymptotic safety scenario is not realized, but something like a string theory is needed
to describe (generalized) spacetime at distances shorter than the Planck scale, the
lattice theory may still provide a good description of physics down to a few Planck
lengths. Independent of what the underlying fundamental theory turns out to be,
there will be an effective quantum gravity theory, obtained by integrating out all
degrees of freedom except for the spin-two field, although we will not know a priori
at what distances it will cease to be applicable. The lattice theory we are about to
construct may give a nontrivial description of this near-Planckian regime.
An explicit example of what we have in mind by such an “effective” lattice
theory is given by the Georgi-Glashow model, a three-dimensional Higgs model
with gauge group SO(3). Rotated to Euclidean space it contains “instantons”, that
is, monopole-like configurations. The Georgi-Glashow model was the first (and for
purists still is the only) nonabelian gauge theory where confinement was proved
and monopoles were essential in the proof. Polyakov, who was the first to provide
these arguments [6], understood that a compact abelian U(1)-lattice gauge theory
5

would realize perfectly the confinement mechanism of the nonabelian theory, despite
the fact that it has only a trivial Gaussian (free photon) UV limit. The reason
is that the lattice theory also contains monopoles. In the continuum such abelian
monopoles would be singular, but for any finite lattice spacing the singular behaviour
is regularized and the monopole mass proportional to the inverse lattice spacing a. In
the case of the Georgi-Glashow model, the Higgs field causes a spontaneous breaking
of the SO(3)-gauge group to U(1) and the monopole mass is proportional to mw , the
mass of the massive vector particle. The nonabelian massive vector particles and the
Higgs field enter nontrivially only in the monopole core which is of size 1/mw . When
distances are longer than 1/mw , the Georgi-Glashow model behaves essentially like
a U(1)-gauge theory, but with monopoles, i.e. like the compact U(1)-lattice gauge
theory. In this way the lattice theory provides a perfect long-distance model for
the Euclidean Georgi-Glashow model, including a description of nonperturbative
physics like confinement.
Are there any problems in principle with adopting a lattice regularization of
quantum gravity? Naı̈vely comparing with the classical continuum description one
could be worried that a lattice regularization “somehow” breaks the diffeomorphism
invariance present in the continuum theory. Apart from the possibility that symmetries broken by a lattice may be restored in an appropriate continuum limit, the
analogy with the standard continuum description of gravity may be misleading on
this point. Given a d-dimensional topological manifold one can introduce a piecewise linear geometry on it by choosing a triangulation, assigning lengths to its links
(the 1-simplices), and insisting that the interior of each d-simplex is flat (this works
for both Euclidean and Minkowskian spacetime signature). This setting allows for
geodesic curves between any two points, whose lengths are well defined, as are the
angles between intersecting geodesics. The key observation is that in this way we
equip the manifold with a continuous geometry without having to introduce any coordinate system. Keeping the data which characterize the piecewise linear geometry,
namely, the triangulation together with the link length assignments, the coordinate
gauge redundancy of the continuum theory is no longer present.

1.4

Gravitational path integral via triangulation

When using the path integral to formulate a nonperturbative quantum field theory of gravity, one must sum over all geometries (with certain chosen boundary
conditions). A natural choice for the domain of the path integral is the set of all
continuous geometries, of which the piecewise linear geometries are a subclass, which
presumably will be dense when the space of continuous geometries is equipped with
a suitable distance measure.
We can change a given linear geometry in two ways, by changing either the length
assignments of its links or the abstract triangulation itself (which will usually require
an accompanying change of link lengths too). The domain of the gravitational
path integral we are going to consider consists of distinct triangulations of a given
6

topological manifold M, with the additional specification that all link lengths are
fixed to the same value a, which will play the role of a UV lattice cutoff. This
implies that each abstract triangulation is associated with a piecewise flat geometry
(a “simplicial manifold”), which is unique up to graph automorphisms. Performing
the path integral amounts to summing over the set of abstract triangulations of M.
To the extent we can associate a suitable gravitational action S[T ] to each piecewise
linear geometry T , we can now approximate the sum over all geometries on M by
summing over the chosen set of abstract triangulations,
X 1
Za =
eiS[T ] ,
(2)
C
T
T

where a refers to the cutoff introduced above. Note that the lattice spacing a is a
physical, and not a coordinate length. The appearance in (2) of CT , the order of the
automorphism group of T , implies that the (very rare) triangulations which possess
such symmetries have a smaller weight in the path integral.
The partition function Za can be understood as a regularization of the formal
continuum path integral
Z
Z = D[gµν ] eiS[gµν ] ,
(3)

where the integration is nominally over all geometries (diffeomorphism equivalence
classes [gµν ] of smooth four-metrics gµν ) of the given manifold M.2 By contrast, the
sum (2) does not in any way refer to diffeomorphisms, since we are summing directly
over geometries. Despite summing over “lattices” of spacetime, we are therefore not
breaking diffeomorphism-invariance; what is more, the diffeomorphism group does
not act on the triangulation data.
Using triangulations (and piecewise linear geometry) in the way just described
goes by the name of dynamical triangulations (DT) and was first introduced in two
dimensions [7, 8, 9], mainly as a regularization of string theory, and later in three[10, 11, 12] and four-dimensional gravity [13, 14].
In the case of four-dimensional quantum gravity, an expression like (3) is of course
entirely formal. One way to try to make some sense of it in a nonperturbative context
is by introducing a cutoff like in (2) and investigating whether the limit a → 0
exists. Existence in this context means that one can use the partition function Za
to calculate the expectation values of certain observables O as
1 X 1 iS[T ]
hOia =
e
O[T ],
(4)
Za T CT
2

When doing computations in standard continuum general relativity, one has little choice but to
adopt a concrete coordinate system and work with metric and curvature tensors which explicitly
depend on these coordinates. In the path integral one would like to get rid of this coordinate
freedom
again, by “factoring out” the four-dimensional diffeomorphism group. The formal notation
R
D[gµν ] for the diffeomorphism-invariant integration in the continuum path integral (3) leaves of
course entirely open how the quotient of metrics modulo diffeomorphisms is to be realized in
practice (and the measure chosen).

7

and relate these regularized observables to observables defined in the continuum
according to standard scaling relations of the type
hOia = a−∆ hOicont + O(a−∆+1).

(5)

For an arbitrary choice of bare coupling constants in the lattice action S[T ] such
a scaling will in general not be possible, but close to a fixed point, if it exists, the
correlation lengths of certain correlators may diverge when expressed in terms of
the number of lattice spacings, and a scaling like (5) may be present. Recent work
exploring the asymptotic safety scenario in a continuum setting provides encouraging
evidence of the existence of a fixed point. If it exists one should be able to locate it
using a lattice approach.

1.5

The Wilsonian point of view

To locate the fixed points of a lattice theory, one first has to choose a lattice action,
which will depend on a set of bare coupling constants. By varying these one may
encounter phase transitions, which divide the coupling-constant space into regions
characterized by different expectation values of certain observables acting as order
parameters. An archetypal system of this type in statistical mechanics is a spin
model on a lattice, whose order parameter is the magnetization. The change of coupling constants in the action (the Hamiltonian of the statistical system) is in this
case implemented by changing the temperature, which appears as an overall factor
multiplying the various couplings associated with different pieces of the Hamiltonian. The system may have a phase transition of first or higher order at a certain
temperature. The latter is usually associated with a divergent spin-spin correlation
length, when measured in lattice units. The fact that the lattice becomes irrelevant
when we look at the long-distance properties of the spin system explains why we
may be able to associate a continuum (Euclidean) quantum field theory with the
spin system at such a critical point.
Finally, the coupling constants which need to be renormalized in the ensuing
continuum quantum field theory are closely related to what we called the relevant
couplings of the lattice theory. These are the coupling constants which need to
be fine-tuned in order to reach the critical surface. The “renormalized” coupling
constants of the continuum theory are usually not determined by the values of the
relevant lattice coupling constants at the critical surface, but rather by the way the
relevant coupling constants approach their value on the critical surface (where the
long-distance physics is identical to the physics at the critical point).
Let us give a concrete illustration of how this procedure works. Consider an
observable O(xn ), where xn denotes a lattice point, with xn = a n and n measuring
the position in integer lattice spacings. The correlation length ξ(g0) in lattice units
is determined from the leading behaviour of the correlator,
− loghO(xn )O(ym )i ∼ |n − m|/ξ(g0) + o(|n − m|).
8

(6)

We now approach the critical surface by fine-tuning the relevant bare coupling constant g0 to its critical value g0c such that the correlation length becomes infinite. The
way in which ξ(g0 ) diverges for g0 → g0c determines how the lattice spacing a should
be taken to zero as a function of the coupling constants, namely, like
ξ(g0) ∝

1
,
|g0 − g0c |ν

a(g0 ) ∝ |g0 − g0c |ν .

(7)

This particular scaling of the lattice spacing ensures that one can define a physical
mass mph by
mph a(g0 ) = 1/ξ(g0),
(8)
such that the correlator hO(xn )O(ym )i falls off exponentially like e−mph |xn −ym | for
g0 → g0c when |xn − ym |, but not |n − m|, is kept fixed in the limit g0 → g0c .
In this way we obtain a picture where the underlying lattice spacing goes to zero
while the physical mass (or the correlation length measured in physical length units,
not in lattice spacings) is kept fixed when we approach the critical point. The mass
is thus defined by the approach to the critical point, and not at the critical point,
where the correlation length is infinite. This is the standard Wilsonian scenario
for obtaining the continuum (Euclidean) quantum field theory associated with the
critical point g0c of a second-order phase transition. Although we obtain a continuum
quantum field theory in this way, one should keep in mind that it could be trivial,
in the sense of being a free field theory. For example, it is generally believed that
for spacetime dimension larger than or equal to four the continuum field theories
corresponding to spin systems are all trivial. By contrast, the above-mentioned
Wilson-Fisher fixed point in three dimensions is related to a nontrivial quantum field
theory. Another thing to note is that – in the spirit of the asymptotic safety scenario
– the co-dimension of the critical surface is finite-dimensional and we therefore have
only a finite number of relevant directions in coupling-constant space (just one in
the example above). If this was not the case we would have no chance of finding the
critical surface by varying a few of the coupling constants “by hand”.

1.6

Applying Wilsonian ideas to gravity

Is there any chance of implementing the above construction in the case of quantum
gravity? The answer is yes, if we take some gravity-specific aspects into account. A
basic assumption underlying the Wilsonian description of critical phenomena is that
of a divergent correlation length when we approach the critical surface. However,
in the absence of any preferred background metric it is not immediately clear what
will play the role of a correlation length in quantum gravity. To address this issue,
let us consider first a theory of gravity coupled to scalar fields. This makes it easier
to discuss correlators, since we can simply use the scalar field φ as the observable
O in (8). Because of the diffeomorphism-invariance of the continuum description
of the theory, it makes little sense to talk about the behaviour of hφ(x)φ(y)i as a
function of the coordinate distance between x and y, because this does not have
9

a diffeomorphism-invariant meaning. The geometrically appropriate notion is to
use the geodesic distance dgµν (x, y) instead. Using it, we arrive at the following
invariant continuum definition of the field correlator in matter-coupled quantum
gravity, namely,
hφφ(R)i ≡
(9)
ZZ
Z
p
p
[gµν ]
dx dy −g(x) −g(y) hφ(x)φ(y)imatter
D[gµν ] eiS[gµν ]
δ(R−dgµν (x, y)),
[g

]

µν
where the term hφ(x)φ(y)imatter
denotes the correlator of the matter fields calculated
for a fixed geometry [gµν (x)]. It depends on the specific action chosen for the matter
field, which in turn will depend on the geometry of the manifold. The δ-function
ensures that the geodesic distance between points labeled by x and y is fixed to R,
and the double integral implements an averaging over all pairs of spacetime points.
Characteristically, the definition (9) is nonlocal; we presently do not know of a
suitable local definition of a correlation function in the full quantum theory. This
aspect is reminiscent of a general feature of observables in (quantum) gravity. If
we insist that metric-dependent continuum observables should be invariant under
diffeomorphisms, there exist no such quantities which are local.
What we are looking for in the quantum theory are quantities whose ensemble
average is physically meaningful. Even in a formulation which is purely geometric,
like the CDT quantum gravity to be described below, this is a nontrivial requirement. The point is that in constructing a two-point function, say, we cannot mark
any two specific points in a way that is meaningful in the ensemble of geometries
constituting the domain of the path integral. We can pick two points in a given
geometry, but there is no canonical way of picking “the same two points” in any
other geometry. The best we can do is to sum over all pairs of points (with mutual
distance R, say) for a given geometry, and then repeat the process for all other geometries. This is precisely how the continuum expression (9) was conceived. Despite
its nonlocal nature, we can ask physical questions about hφφ(R)i as a function of
R, and discuss its short- and long-distance behaviour. In this way we can realize
a Wilsonian scenario of matter fields coupled to gravity, whose correlation length
diverges when the lattice cutoff is removed. In two-dimensional toy models of fluctuating geometries coupled to matter the existence of such divergent correlation
lengths has been verified explicitly [15].3
It is less obvious how to use a definition like (9) in pure gravity and how to think
about a correlation length in that case. In the absence of a well-defined classical
background, trying to identify a graviton as the limit of a massive lattice graviton
may not be the most appropriate thing to do. One can imagine various scenarios
here, which will have to be verified or falsified by explicitly analyzing the lattice

3

As an aside note that even in ordinary lattice field theories, in order to get optimal statistics in
computer simulations when measuring correlators, one uses a nonlocal definition like (9) (without
the integration of metrics), taking advantage of the (lattice) translational and rotational invariance.

10

gravity theory in question. On the one hand, one may encounter a phenomenon like
the Coulomb phase in abelian gauge theories in four-dimensional lattice theories,
where the gauge field excitations cannot be considered massive, despite the fact
that they live on a finite lattice. On the other hand, the three-dimensional compact
U(1)-lattice theory mentioned above is an example where lattice artifacts (the lattice
monopoles) in spite of gauge invariance create a mass gap in the theory, but one
which vanishes when the lattice spacing is taken to zero.
While it may not be immediately useful as a graviton propagator, an expression
like (9) can still give us nontrivial information about the nature of quantum spacetime. For example, dropping the scalar field in (9) by putting hφ(x)φ(y)imatter = 1,
we still have a diffeomorphism-invariant expression, which tests the average volume
of a geodesic ball of radius R. For small R, it will determine the fractal dimension of
spacetime, which in a theory of quantum gravity may be different from the canonical
dimension put in by hand at the outset (when fixing the dimension of the fundamental building blocks). This fractal dimension has been studied in two-dimensional
quantum gravity, both analytically and by computer simulations [16, 17], as well as
numerically in four-dimensional quantum gravity models [18, 19].

1.7

Lorentzian versus Euclidean

An expression like (9) raises the question of the signature of spacetime in a theory of
gravity. Although we introduced this quantity in physical, Lorentzian signature, using it to extract a fractal dimension (via geodesic balls) implicitly assumed a rotation
to Euclidean signature; also the two-dimensional measurements of this correlator we
mentioned earlier were obtained in the context of Euclidean “gravity”. In equations
(2)-(4) we kept the “i” in front of the action, signaling that we were dealing with
“real” quantum field theory, where spacetime has a Lorentzian signature, and where
“correlation functions” are quantum amplitudes, and thus inherently complex. On
the other hand, we have been referring to a “Wilsonian scenario”, which is primarily valid for statistical systems. In such a Euclidean context, “spacetime” is also
Euclidean.
Of course, as long as we are dealing with quantum field theory in Minkowskian
flat spacetime, the Osterwalder-Schrader axioms guarantee the existence of a welldefined correspondence between the correlators calculated using the Euclidean path
integral with a Euclidean action SE , and the correlators calculated via the path
integral using a related Minkowskian action SM [20]. This is why second-order
phase transitions in statistical systems are relevant for quantum field theory. When
it comes to gravitational theories it is not directly clear what it means to “associate”
a Euclidean path integral with a given Lorentzian one, which for the case of a
scalar field on Minkowski space simply takes the form of an analytic continuation
t 7→ τ = it in time with associated map
Z
Z
iSM [φM ]
ZM = DφM e
7→ ZE = DφE e−SE [φE ] .
(10)
11

One problem in the continuum theory is that we do not know of a general map
(M )
(E)
between Lorentzian metrics gµν and real positive-definite metrics gµν such that
their associated Einstein-Hilbert actions satisfy
Z p
Z p
(M
)
(E)
iSM = i
−g (M ) R(gµν ) → −
g (E) R(gµν
) ≡ −SE .
(11)

The reason is that the Wick rotation in the form of an analytic continuation in time
does not generalize to arbitrary curved spacetimes. Beyond the very special case of
static and stationary metrics, there is no distinguished notion of time with respect
to which we could Wick-rotate, and Wick rotation does not commute with the
action of the diffeomorphism group. Besides, Wick-rotating will in general produce
complex and not real metrics, defeating the purpose of rendering the path integral
real. Even if we started from the set of all real Euclidean metrics, ad hoc declaring
it as a fundamental input, we would still need an inverse Wick rotation and also
be faced with the problem that the Euclidean gravitational action SE is unbounded
from below. This unboundedness is caused by the conformal mode of the metric,
whose kinetic term enters the kinetic term of (both the Lorentzian and Euclidean
action) with the “wrong” sign. As a consequence, rapid variations of the conformal
mode can make SE in eq. (11) arbitrarily negative.
There are different routes to try to avoid that this unboundedness causes a
problem in the Euclidean path integral. One possibility is to start from a different classical action, involving higher-derivative terms which stabilize the negative,
second-order kinetic term of the conformal mode [21]. Alternatively, one can take
special care of the conformal mode when defining the Euclidean path integral, for
example, by analytically continuing it differently from the other modes of the metric [22, 23]. Apart from making the Euclidean action well defined, the inclusion of
higher-derivative terms may also help to cure gravity’s nonrenormalizability, since its
propagator can then contain fourth powers of the momentum in the denominators.
Unfortunately, this prescription is generally believed to spoil the unitarity of the
corresponding Lorentzian theory by introducing spurious poles in the propagator.
In an asymptotic safety scenario there is nothing unnatural about a UV fixed
point at which higher-derivative terms play a dominant role, but also in this case
it remains a major challenge to show that a sensible, unitary theory emerges at
the end of the day. It is possible to avoid the problem of unitarity violation even
when higher-derivative terms are involved, provided they are not “generic”. For
instance, special symmetry can prevent unitarity-violating processes. Arguments of
this kind have been given in a version of conformal gravity [24]. Also, other scaleinvariant versions of gravity theories where the higher-derivative terms come from
integrating out matter fields are likely to be free from this problem [25]. Finally,
to avoid nonunitarity but still keep the improved renormalizability associated with
higher-derivative terms, P. Hořava has recently suggested a new class of gravitational
theories. They are asymmetric in space and time in the sense that higher-derivative
terms appear, but only in the form of spatial derivatives [26]. If this formulation
12

is to lead to a viable theory of quantum gravity, one will need to show that the
spacetime asymmetry is not in contradiction with observed physics like, for example,
the Lorentz invariance of an (approximately) Minkowskian solution at sufficiently
large distance scales.

1.8

Causal Dynamical Triangulations 101

Our attempt to formulate a nonperturbative theory of quantum gravity has to address the issues raised above. We will do this here in summary fashion, in order
to not get lost in the details. The theory is defined on a manifold M of topology
Σ × [0, 1], with Σ a three-dimensional manifold, usually chosen to have the topology of a three-sphere S 3 , but in principle any other fixed topology could be used.
This implies that M has two boundaries Σ(0) and Σ(1).4 The four-geometries we
are going to sum over in the path integral are such that the induced geometry on
these boundaries is spatial and that Σ(1) is separated by a proper-time distance
τ from Σ(0). Translated to a continuum language the closest description for such
geometries would be in terms of 3+1 ADM-decomposed metrics, with infinitesimal
line element given by
ds2 = −N 2 (xi , t)dt2 + hij (xi , t)(dxi + N i (xi , t)dt)(dxj + N j (xi , t)dt),

(12)

where N(x, i) is the lapse and Ni (x, t) the shift function, with the additional restriction that the boundaries be separated by a fixed proper time. The latter restriction is
made for the convenience of the lattice set-up and will allow us in principle to define
a transfer matrix between adjacent spatial slices and from it a quantum Hamiltonian.5 The presence of a proper-time slicing brings this path integral over geometries
to a form closely related to the canonical formulation of (quantum) gravity (see, for
example, [27]).
Our approach to quantum gravity, dubbed “Causal Dynamical Triangulations
(CDT)”, provides an explicit lattice formulation of quantum gravity, where the
spacetime geometries have Lorentzian signature, and we have identified a notion of
proper time on each of them.6 It can be thought of as a lattice implementation of
a continuum proper-time path integral advocated by Teitelboim [32]. It turns out
that the CDT formulation allows us to rotate each lattice geometry to a lattice geometry with Euclidean signature. More precisely, the lattice construction contains
spacelike links of length-squared a2 and timelike links of length-squared −αa2 . An
4

As we will see below, this specific choice of boundaries will not play a significant role in our
computer simulations of four-dimensional quantum gravity.
5
The continuum analogy (12) has to be treated with some care, since the geometries in the path
integral will not be described in terms of coordinate systems, and moreover will certainly not be
smooth, unlike what is usually assumed in the classical continuum theory.
6
Previous reviews of CDT quantum gravity can be found in [28], sets of lecture notes in [29], and
nontechnical accounts in [30]. Reference [31] is a comprehensive review covering lattice approaches
to quantum gravity prior to CDT.

13

analytic continuation in the lower-half complex plane from positive to negative α
changes the geometry from Lorentzian to Euclidean. This resembles the standard
analytic continuation t 7→ τ = it of the time coordinate in ordinary flat spacetime
when moving from Lorentzian to Euclidean signature. In the case at hand, it is an
analytic continuation of the piecewise linear geometry. Once we have geometries
with Euclidean signature, we can view the model as a standard statistical model,
taking the form of a sum over a class of Euclidean geometries with positive weights.
However, each of these Euclidean geometries has a causal, Lorentzian origin and is
therefore not generic from a Euclidean point of view. This makes the CDT path
integral – after Wick-rotating – distinct from a sum over all Euclidean geometries.
Whatever expression we obtain after summing over this subclass of Euclidean geometries, will generically carry an α-dependence, whose role in any eventual continuum
theory has to be understood. Furthermore, a physical interpretation of results will
usually require a suitable “inverse rotation” back to Lorentzian signature. For fourdimensional results this is not straightforward, since they are currently all based
on computer simulations. Their Lorentzian interpretation will typically require care
and further analysis.
The above analytic continuation in α also leads to a specific analytic continuation
of the Einstein-Hilbert action. As shown by Regge, and as will be discussed in detail
below, the Einstein-Hilbert action has a natural implementation on piecewise linear
geometries. It is compatible with the analytic continuation in α in the sense that
iSL (α) 7→ −SE (−α),

(13)

where SL (α) is the Lorentzian Einstein-Hilbert action for a given value of α and
SE (−α) the Euclidean Einstein-Hilbert action for the negative value of α. Thus
our analytic continuation of geometries satisfies (11) and (10), with the difference
that it is not an ad hoc mapping between the two path integrals, but a mapping
between individual geometries. – What has happened to the unboundedness of the
Euclidean Einstein-Hilbert action in this formulation? It is regularized by a finite
lattice spacing a, but will resurface in the limit a → 0.7 However, inside the path
integral it can happen that configurations with unbounded action are suppressed
entropically and thus play no role in the continuum limit. We will discuss this
mechanism shortly.
As long as we stay with Euclidean signature we can use tools and techniques from
statistical field theory and the theory of critical phenomena when searching for fixed
7
The fact that the behaviour of the conformal factor is captured correctly, even in the context
of dynamical lattices, is nicely illustrated in two dimensions [33]. The formalism of dynamical
triangulations (DT), which provides a regularization of two-dimensional Euclidean Einstein-Hilbert
quantum gravity coupled to conformal matter, can be used to calculate the conformal factor for
each configuration in the (discretized) path integral. The result can be compared to the continuum
theory (quantum Liouville theory), and good agreement is found. As described in [33], one even has
an analogy to the entropy-driven Kosterlitz-Thouless phase transition described below, namely, the
condensation of spikes at the c = 1 barrier of Euclidean two-dimensional quantum gravity coupled
to conformal field theory.

14

points where the lattice formulation may have a continuum interpretation. Suppose
now that we have a phase diagram with an order parameter related to geometry.
(This describes the actual situation in four dimensions, as we will see later.) We can
then classify transition points, lines or surfaces according to the order of the transitions, which can be established by measuring the behaviour of the order parameter
as we approach the transitions. In line with standard folklore from the theory of
critical phenomena, a second-order transition should be associated with the existence of a continuum (quantum) field theory. This answers a question raised earlier:
also in theories of quantum gravity the standard Wilsonian machinery appears to
remain at our disposal, although some of its aspects may have to be adapted. As
mentioned above, the concept of a divergent correlation length as one approaches
the critical surface plays a key role in the Wilsonian picture, but its construction
and interpretation in quantum gravity is less straightforward. Fortunately, there
exist definitions like (9) which are diffeomorphism-invariant and have been shown
to work in toy models of two-dimensional quantum gravity (see [15]).
This brings us to the next point. If we succeed in identifying a potential UV
fixed point, it cannot simply be Gaussian, since gravity is not renormalizable by
conventional power counting (which would be applicable at a Gaussian fixed point).
In addition, the nature of the fixed point had better be such that the unboundedness
of the Euclidean action does not dominate when the cutoff is taken to zero. How
is this possible without including explicit terms in the bare action to curb this unboundedness, for example, in the form of higher-derivative terms, which in turn may
create unitarity problems? We hinted above at the possibility that the path integral
configurations leading to an unbounded action upon removal of the cutoff could be
suppressed for entropical reasons. Nonperturbatively, the effective Euclidean action
contains an explicit “entropic” term, coming from the number of geometries that
share a given classical action. Such a term cannot play any role in a semiclassical
expansion, where one can choose ~ arbitrarily small and thus the weight of the classical action for some configurations with negative SE arbitrarily large. Since the
entropy term is not associated with any adjustable coupling constant, the action
weight can always be made to dominate over it. By contrast, a nonperturbative UV
fixed point does not necessarily allow anything like a semiclassical expansion, and
the values of the bare coupling constants close to it may lie in a region where the
Boltzmann weight of the action is comparable with the entropy term.

1.9

Entropic QUANTUM gravity

An example from lattice field theory, the famous Kosterlitz-Thouless transition in
the two-dimensional XY-model, can serve as an illustration of the situation. The
XY-model is a lattice spin model, whose “spins” are two-dimensional vectors of unit
length. In two spatial dimensions, this model has vortex configurations, with an
energy per vortex of approximately
E = κ ln(R/a),
15

(14)

where κ is a coupling constant, R a measure of the linear size of the system and a
the lattice spacing. Ignoring boundary effects, the centre of the vortex can be placed
at any one of the (R/a)2 lattice points. Saturating the path integral (the partition
function) Z by single-vortex configurations, we obtain8
−F/kB T

Z≡e

=

X

−E[spin]/kB T

e

spin configurations

 2
R
e−[κ ln(R/a)]/kB T .
≈
a

(15)

We note that the factor (R/a)2 is entirely entropic, simply arising from counting
the possible single-vortex configurations, and is independent of any “bare” coupling
constants (the spin coupling κ and temperature T ). Since the corresponding entropy
S = kB ln(number of configurations) has the same functional form as the vortex
energy, we can express the free energy as
F = E − ST = (κ − 2kB T ) ln(R/a).

(16)

The Kosterlitz-Thouless transition between a low-temperature phase (where vortices
play no role) and a high-temperature phase (where vortices are important) occurs
when F = 0, i.e. when the entropy factor is comparable to the Boltzmann weight
of the classical energy. At this point we are far away from the naı̈ve weak-coupling
limit of the lattice spin theory, which is just a Gaussian free field. Instead, the
continuum field theory associated with the transition is the sine-Gordon field theory
at the coupling constant value where it changes from a super-renormalizable to a
renormalizable theory.
Are the fixed points of CDT quantum gravity “entropic” in the sense just described? The answer is yes. In fact, it is remarkable that thanks to the geometric
nature of the curvature term, the Regge action in our lattice set-up assumes a very
simple form. We will see later (eq. (195) below) that as a result the lattice partition
function corresponding to the Euclidean path integral (10) becomes essentially the
generating function for the number of triangulations, that is, of geometries. We conclude that in this rather precise sense our quantum gravity theory is, quite literally,
an entropic theory.
Once a candidate fixed point has been located, one can try to make contact with
the exact renormalization group by following the flow of the coupling constants when
approaching the fixed point. The procedure for doing this will be discussed in detail
below. A potential problem in a UV fixed point scenario is unitarity. Here the CDT
lattice formulation comes with an additional bonus, since it allows us to formulate
a simple, sufficient criterion for the unitarity of the theory in terms of properties
of its transfer matrix, namely, reflection positivity. We will show that the CDT
lattice model both has a transfer matrix and obeys reflection positivity, strongly
8

Our present discussion is merely qualitative and meant to highlight the competition between
entropy and Boltzmann weights; exact treatments of the Kosterlitz-Thouless transition are given
in many textbooks, see, e.g. [34].

16

supporting the conjecture that any continuum theory – if it can be shown to exist
– will be unitary.
Having a handle on unitarity is one reason for not using a gravitational action
different from the (Regge version of the) Einstein-Hilbert action. In a Wilsonian
renormalization group context it would be natural to consider more general actions,
involving various higher-order curvature terms. However, for these we would generally not be able to prove generalized reflection positivity. In addition, as we will
describe below, it appears that we already have an interesting phase diagram without
the explicit inclusion of higher-order curvature terms. Of course, the effective action
we eventually hope to construct at the phase transition point will in all likelihood
contain such terms, but then presumably of a more benign nature with respect to
unitarity. This is a common situation in quantum field theory: integrating out one
type of field will usually result in a nonlocal action in the remaining fields, and the
derivative expansion of this action will contain (infinitely many) higher-derivative
terms.
A lattice field theory breaks translational and rotational symmetry explicitly,
which is only restored in the continuum limit. In the ADM-formulation of general
relativity space and time appear on a different footing, but this only implies a
breaking of manifest, and not of intrinsic diffeomorphism-invariance. Our lattice
formulation also has a built-in asymmetry between space and time, which persists
after rotation to Euclidean signature. This may open the possibility that for some
values of the bare coupling constants the theory possesses a continuum limit in which
space and time scale differently. If realized, it would mean that the framework of
CDT quantum gravity is sufficiently general to allow also for the description and
investigation gravitational theories of Hořava-Lifshitz type. Although we are not
putting in any asymmetric action by hand as Hořava did, it is possible that the
effective quantum action does contain such an asymmetry because of the special role
played by time in the lattice construction. In this way the lattice phase diagram
for the theory may a priori have both Hořava-Lifshitz and “isotropic” fixed points,
depending on the choice of the bare coupling constants.

1.10

Overview of what is to come

The rest of this review article is organized as follows: in Sec. 2 we describe the
construction of the CDT lattice model of quantum gravity in two, three and four
dimensions. Sec. 3 deals with the transfer matrix, and Sec. 4 contains the analytic
solution of the two-dimensional model, as well as a discussion of its relation to other
2d gravity models. Sec. 5 discusses various generalizations of the this model. The
higher-dimensional CDT lattice gravity models cannot be solved analytically. One
way to proceed is via Monte Carlo simulations. In Sec. 6 we describe the idea behind
the Monte Carlo updating algorithms used. In Sec. 7 we report on the Monte Carlo
simulations of the four-dimensional CDT model. The phase diagram is presented,
and its resemblance with a Lifshitz phase diagram emphasized, the order parameter
17

being, in a loose sense, the “geometry”. Next, we describe in Sec. 8 in detail the
geometry observed in the so-called phase C and argue that one can view it as a
metric four-sphere with small quantum fluctuations superimposed. Emphasis is put
on explaining the entropic and emergent nature of this result, along the lines sketched
above for the XY-model. In Secs. 9 and 10 we analyze the quantum fluctuations
around the background geometry of phase C and show that the observed scale factor
of the (quantum) universe as well as the fluctuations of the scale factor are described
well by a minisuperspace model assuming homogeneity and isotropy of the universe,
and going back to Hartle and Hawking. Under a few assumptions we can determine
the physical size of our quantum universe in Planck units. This is discussed in
Sec. 11. In Sec. 12 we define the so-called spectral dimension and describe its
measurement, using a covariant diffusion equation. The quantitative evaluation of
the spectral dimension is one concrete piece of evidence that the nontrivial UV
properties of our universe are compatible with both the asymptotic safety scenario
and Hořava-Lifshitz gravity. These approaches provide independent arguments that
the UV-spectral dimension should be two, which within measuring accuracy is in
agreement with what is found in CDT quantum gravity. The construction of an
effective action allows us in principle to follow the flow of the coupling constants
entering the effective action as a function of the bare couplings and the cutoff. In
this way we can in principle discuss the renormalization group flow of the coupling
constants and make contact with exact renormalization group calculations. We will
discuss the general procedure in Sec. 13. Finally, Sec. 14 contains a short summary.

2

The lattice CDT construction

2.1

Discrete Lorentzian spacetimes

Our first task will be to define the class of discrete Lorentzian geometries T which
we will use in the path integral (2). We will mostly follow the treatment of [35].
Briefly, they can be characterized as “globally hyperbolic” d-dimensional simplicial manifolds with a sliced structure, where (d−1)-dimensional “spatial hypersurfaces” of fixed topology are connected by suitable sets of d-dimensional simplices.
The (d − 1)-dimensional spatial hypersurfaces are themselves simplicial manifolds,
defined to be equilaterally triangulated manifolds. As a concession to causality, we
do not allow the spatial slices to change topology as a function of time. There is
a preferred notion of a discrete “time”, namely, the parameter labeling successive
spatial slices. Note, as already emphasized in the introduction, that this has nothing
to do with a gauge choice, since we are not using coordinates in the first place. This
“proper time” is simply part of the invariant geometric data common to each of the
Lorentzian geometries.
We choose a particular set of elementary simplicial building blocks. All spatial
(squared) link lengths are fixed to a2 , and all timelike links to have a squared
length −αa2 , α > 0. Keeping α variable allows for a relative scaling of space- and
18

timelike lengths and is convenient when discussing the Wick rotation later. The
simplices are taken to be pieces of flat Minkowski space, and a simplicial manifold
acquires nontrivial curvature through the way the individual building blocks are
glued together.
As usual in the study of critical phenomena, we expect the final continuum theory
(if it exists) to be largely independent of the details of the chosen discretization.
The virtue of our choice of building blocks is its simplicity and the availability of a
straightforward Wick rotation.
In principle we allow any topology of the (d−1)-dimensional space, but for simplicity and definiteness we will fix the topology to be that of S d−1 . By assumption
we have a foliation of spacetime, where “time” is taken to mean proper time. Each
time-slice, with the topology of S d−1 , is represented by a (d − 1)-dimensional triangulation. Each abstract triangulation of S d−1 can be viewed as constructed by
gluing together (d−1)-simplices whose links are all of (spatial) length as = a, in this
way defining a (d−1)-dimensional piecewise linear geometry on S d−1 with Euclidean
signature.
We now connect two neighbouring S d−1 -triangulations Td−1 (1) and Td−1 (2), associated with two consecutive discrete proper times labeled 1 and 2, and create a
d-dimensional, piecewise linear geometry, such that the corresponding d-dimensional
“slab” consists of d-simplices, has the topology of [0, 1] × S d−1 , and has Td−1 (1) and
Td−1 (2) as its (d−1)-dimensional boundaries. The spatial links (and subsimplices)
contained in these d-dimensional simplices lie in either Td−1 (1) or Td−1 (2), and the
remaining links are declared timelike with proper length squared a2t = −αa2 , α > 0.
Subsimplices which contain at least one timelike link we will call “timelike”. In discrete units, we can say that Td−1 (1) and Td−1 (2) are√
separated by a single “step” in
time direction, corresponding to a timelike distance αa in the sense that each link
in the slab which connects the two boundaries has a squared proper length −αa2 . It
does not imply that all points on the piecewise linear manifold defined by Td (1) have
a proper distance squared −αa2 to the piecewise linear manifold defined by Td (2) in
the piecewise Minkowskian metric of the triangulation, so when we sometimes say
that the time-slices Td (1) and Td (2) are separated by a proper-time at , it is meant
in the above sense.
Thus, our slabs or “sandwiches” are assembled from d-dimensional simplicial
building blocks of d kinds, which are labeled according to the number of vertices
they share with the two adjacent spatial slices of (discretized) proper time which we
labeled 1 and 2. A (d, 1)-simplex has one (d−1)-simplex (and consequently d vertices)
in common with Td−1 (1), and only one vertex in common with Td−1 (2). It has d
timelike links, connecting each of the d vertices in Td−1 (1) to the vertex belonging to
Td−1 (2). The next kind of d-simplex shares a (d−2)-dimensional spatial subsimplex
with Td−1 (1) and a one-dimensional spatial subsimplex (i.e. a link) with Td−1 (2), and
is labeled a (d−1, 2)-simplex, where the label again reflects the number of vertices it
shares with Td−1 (1) and Td−1 (2). It has 2(d−2) timelike links. This continues all the
way to a (1, d)-simplex. We can view the (d−k, k+1) simplex as the “time-reversal”
19

(a)

(b)

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Top figure: a (2,1)-simplex and a (1,2)-simplex and the way they are glued together to
form a “slab” (strip). The ends of the strip should be joined to form a band with topology S 1 ×[0, 1].
Middle figure: a (3,1)-tetrahedron (fig. (a)) and a (2,2)-tetrahedron (fig. (b))in three dimensions.
Bottom figure: a (4,1)-simplex (fig. (a)) and a (3,2)-simplex (fig. (b)) in four dimensions.

of the (k+1, d−k)-simplex. Gluing together the d-simplices such that they form a slab
means that we identify some of timelike (d−1)-dimensional subsimplices belonging
to different d-simplices. It is only possible to glue a (k+1, d−k)-simplex to a simplex
of the same type or to simplices of types (k, d+1−k) and (k+2, d−k−1). An allowed
d-dimensional triangulation of the slab has topology [0, 1] × S d−1 , is a simplicial
manifold with boundaries, and is constructed according to the recipe above.
The allowed simplices (up to time reversal for d=3,4), are shown in Fig. 1 for
d=2,3,4.

2.2

The action associated with piecewise linear geometries

A path in the gravitational path integral consists of a sequence of triangulations
of S d−1 , denoted by Td−1 (k), k = 0, . . . , n, where the spacetime between each pair
Td−1 (k) and Td−1 (k + 1) has been filled in by a layer of d-simplices as just described.
In the path integral we sum over all possible sequences {Td−1 (k)} and all possible
ways of triangulating the slabs in between Td−1 (k) and Td−1 (k + 1). The weight
assigned to each geometry depends on the Einstein-Hilbert action associated with
the geometry. Let us discuss how the Einstein-Hilbert action can be defined on
piecewise linear geometry in an entirely geometric way. This description goes back
to Regge [36].
20

Let us consider a piecewise linear d-dimensional geometry with Euclidean signature, constructed by gluing d-dimensional simplices together such that they form
a triangulation. We change for a moment to Euclidean signature just to make the
geometric discussion more intuitive. The d-simplices are building blocks for our
piecewise linear geometries. The curvature of such a piecewise linear geometry is
located at the (d − 2)-dimensional subsimplices. A number of d-simplices σid will
share a (d − 2)-subsimplex σ0d−2 . Each of the d-simplices σid has a dihedral angle9
θ(σid , σ0d−2 ) associated with the given (d−2)-dimensional subsimplex σ0d−2 . The sum
of dihedral angles of the d-simplices sharing the subsimplex would add up to 2π if
space around that subsimplex is flat. If the dihedral angles add up to something
different it signals that the piecewise linear space is not flat. The difference to 2π is
called the deficit angle εσd−2 associated with the subsimplex σ0d−2 ,
0


X
d−2
εσd−2 = 2π −
θ(σ d , σ d−2 ) eiφ(σ ) .
(17)
σd ∋σd−2

The phase φ(σ d−2 ) is 0 if σ d−2 is timelike and −π/2 if σ d−2 is spacelike. The reason a
phase factor appears in the definition is that in a geometry with Lorentzian geometry
the dihedral angles can be complex (see later for explicit expressions, and Appendix
1 for a short discussion of Lorentzian angles). For a subsimplex σ d−2 which is entirely
spacelike the real part of the sum of the dihedral angles is 2π and the phase factor
ensures that εσd−2 is real. For a timelike subsimplex σ d−2 the sum of the dihedral
angles is real. If we have a triangulation of flat Minkowskian spacetime the deficit
angles are zero.
We can view the piecewise linear geometry as flat except when we cross the
(d−2)-subsimplices. Regge proved (see also [38] for a detailed discussion) that one
should associate the curvature
2εσd−2 Vσd−2
(18)
with a (d−2)-subsimplex σ d−2 , where Vσd−2 denotes the volume of the subsimplex
σ d−2 . Let us define
X
2
Vd (σ d−2 ) =
Vσ d ,
(19)
d(d + 1)
d−2
σ∋σ

d

where Vσd is the volume of the d-simplex σ and where the factor 2/d(d+1) distributes
the volume of the d-simplices equally between its d(d+1)/2 (d−2)-subsimplices. If
Td−2 denotes the (d−2)-subsimplices in the triangulation T , the total volume and
total curvature of T are now
X
Vd (T ) =
Vd (σ d−2 )
(20)
σd−2 ∈ Td−2

9

Given a d-simplex and all its subsimplices, any of the (d−2)-subsimplices will be the intersection
(the common face) of precisely two (d−1)-subsimplices. The angle (and it is an angle for any d ≥ 2)
between these (d−1)-subsimplices is called the dihedral angle of the (d−2)-subsimplex in the given
d-simplex.

21

and
Rtot (T ) = 2

X

Vd (σ d−2 ) εσd−2

σd−2 ∈ Td−2

Vσd−2
.
Vd (σ d−2 )

(21)

One can think of (20) and (21) as the total volume and total curvature of the
piecewise linear geometry associated with T , the counterparts of the integrals of the
volume and curvature densities on a smooth manifold M with geometry defined by
a metric gµν (ξ), that is,
Z
Z
p
p
d
dd ξ −g(ξ) R(ξ).
(22)
Vd (g) =
d ξ −g(ξ) and Rtot (g) =
M

M

More generally, since we are considering manifolds with boundaries, when the (d−2)simplex is a boundary subsimplex, the deficit angle is defined as in eq. (17) except
that in this case 2π is replaced by π. THe continuum expression corresponding to
(21) is
Z
Z
p
p
d
Rtot (g) =
d ξ −g(ξ) R(ξ) +
dd−1 ξ h(ξ) K(ξ),
(23)
M

∂M

where the last integral is over the boundary of M with the induced metric and K(ξ)
denotes the trace of second fundamental form.

2.3

Volumes and dihedral angles

We will now go on to compute the volumes and dihedral angles of the d-dimensional Minkowskian simplices, because they are needed in the gravitational Regge
action in dimension d. All (Lorentzian) volumes in any dimension we will be using
are by definition real and positive. Formulas for Euclidean volumes and dihedral
angles can be derived from elementary geometric arguments and may be found in
many places in the literature [37]. They may be continued to Lorentzian geometries
by taking suitable care of factors of i and −1. We will follow Sorkin’s treatment
and conventions for the Lorentzian case [38]. (Some basic facts about Lorentzian
angles are summarized in Appendix 1). The dihedral angles Θ are chosen such that
0 ≤ ReΘ ≤ π, so giving sin Θ and cos Θ fixes them uniquely. The angles are in
general complex, but everything can be arranged so that the action comes out real
in the end, as we shall see.
We now list systematically the geometric data we will need for simplices of various
dimensions d > 0. As above we denote a simplex (k, d + 1 − k). We also allow
k = 0, which means that all vertices of the simplex belong to a spatial hyperplane t = constant. These have no α-dependence. We also only list the geometric
properties of the simplices with k ≥ d+1−k since the rest of the simplices can be
obtained by time-reversal.
2.3.1

d=0

In this case the simplex is a point and we have by convention Vol(point)= 1.
22

2.3.2

d=1

A link can be spacelike or timelike in accordance with the definitions given above,
and a spacelike link has by definition the length a, with no α-dependence. For the
timelike link we have
√
Vol(1,1) = α a.
(24)
2.3.3

d=2

Also for the triangles, we must distinguish between space- and timelike. The former lie entirely in planes t = const and have no α-dependence, whereas the latter
extrapolate between two such slices. Their respective volumes are
√
√
and
Vol(2,1 ) = 41 4α + 1 a2 .
Vol(3,0) = 43 a2
(25)
We do not need the dihedral angles for the two-dimensional simplices since they only
enter when calculating the total curvature of a two-dimensional simplicial manifold,
and it is a topological invariant, 2πχ, where χ is the Euler characteristic of the
manifold.
2.3.4

d=3

We have three types of three-simplices (up to time-reflection), but need only the
dihedral angles of the timelike three-simplices. Their volumes are
√

2 3
Vol(4, 0) =
a,
12

Vol(3, 1) =

√

3α + 1 3
a,
12

Vol(2, 2) =

√

2α + 1 3
√
a.
6 2

(26)

.
A timelike three-simplex has dihedral angles around its timelike links (TL) and
its spacelike links (SL) and we find
√
2 3α + 1
i
SL
SL
sin Θ(3,1) = √ √
(27)
cos Θ(3,1) = − √ √
3 4α + 1
3 4α + 1
√ √
2α
+
1
α 3α + 1
2
L
L
cos ΘT(3,1)
=
sin ΘT(3,1)
=
(28)
4α + 1
4α
√+√1
2 2 2α + 1
4α + 3
sin ΘSL
(29)
cos ΘSL
(2,2) = −i
(2,2) =
4α + 1
4α + 1
√ √
1
2 2α 2α + 1
L
L
cos ΘT(2,2)
=−
sin ΘT(2,2)
=
(30)
4α + 1
4α + 1

23

2.3.5

d=4

In d = 4 there are up to reflection symmetry two types of four-simplices, (4,1) and
(3,2). Their volumes are given by
Vol(4, 1) =

1√
8α + 3 a4 ,
96

Vol(3, 2) =

1√
12α + 7 a4 .
96

(31)

For the four-dimensional simplices the dihedral angles are located at the triangles,
which can be spacelike (SL) or timelike (TL). For the (4,1)-simplices there are four
SL-triangles and six TL-triangles. For the (3,2)-simplices there is one SL-triangle.
However, there are now two kinds of TL-triangles. For one type (TL1) the dihedral
angle is between two (2,2)-tetrahedra belonging to the four-simplex, while for the
other type (TL2) the dihedral angle is between a (3,1)- and a (2,2)-tetrahedron.
Explicitly, the list of angles is
i
cos ΘSL
(4,1) = − √ √
2 2 3α + 1
2α + 1
2(3α + 1)
6α + 5
cos ΘSL
(3,2) =
2(3α + 1)

L
cos ΘT(4,1)
=

L1
cos ΘT(3,2)
=

2.4

4α + 3
4(2α + 1)

−1
L2
cos ΘT(3,2)
= p
2 2(2α + 1)(3α + 1)

s

3(8α + 3)
8(3α + 1)
√
√
4α + 1 8α + 3
TL
sin Θ(4,1) =
2(3α + 1)
√ √
3 12α + 7
sin ΘSL
(3,2) = −i
2(3α + 1)
p
(4α + 1)(12α + 7)
L1
sin ΘT(3,2)
=
4(2α + 1)
p
(4α + 1)(12α + 7)
sin Θ(3,2) = p
.
2 2(2α + 1)(3α + 1)

sin ΘSL
(4,1) =

(32)
(33)
(34)
(35)
(36)

Topological identities for Lorentzian triangulations

In this section we derive some important linear relations among the “bulk” variables
Ni , i = 0, . . . , d which count the numbers of i-dimensional simplices in a given ddimensional Lorentzian triangulation. Such identities are familiar from Euclidean
dynamically triangulated manifolds (see, for example, [13, 39, 40]). The best-known
of them is the Euler identity
χ = N0 − N1 + N2 − N3 + . . . ,

(37)

for the Euler characteristic χ of a simplicial manifold with or without boundary. For
our purposes, we will need refined versions where the simplices are distinguished by
their Lorentzian properties. The origin of these relations lies in the simplicial manifold structure. They can be derived in a systematic way by establishing relations

24

among simplicial building blocks in local neighbourhoods and by summing them
over the entire triangulation. Our notation for the numbers Ni is
N0 = number of vertices
N1TL = number of timelike links
N1SL = number of spacelike links
N2TL = number of timelike triangles
N2SL = number of spacelike triangles
(3,1)

N3TL1 ≡ N3

(38)

= number of timelike (3,1)- and (1,3)-tetrahedra

(2,2)
N3TL2 ≡ N3
= number of timelike (2,2)-tetrahedra
SL
N3 = number of spacelike tetrahedra
(4,1)
N4TL1 ≡ N4
= number of timelike (4,1)- and (1,4)-simplices
(3,2)
N4TL2 ≡ N4
= number of timelike (3,2)- and (2,3)-simplices.

2.4.1

Identities in 2+1 dimensions

We will be considering compact spatial slices (2) Σ, and either open or periodic boundary conditions in time-direction. The relevant spacetime topologies are therefore
I × (2) Σ (with an initial and a final spatial surface) and S 1 × (2) Σ. Since the latter
results in a closed three-manifold, its Euler characteristic vanishes. From this we
derive immediately that
χ(I × (2) Σ) = χ((2) Σ).
(39)

(Recall also that for closed two-manifolds with g handles, we have χ = 2 − 2g, for
example, χ(S 2 ) = 2 for the two-sphere.)
Let us for simplicity consider the case of periodic boundary conditions. A threedimensional closed triangulation is characterized by the seven numbers N0 , N1SL ,
(3,1)
(2,2)
and N3 . Two relations among them are directly inherited
N1TL , N2SL , N2TL , N3
from the Euclidean case, namely,
(3,1)

N0 − N1SL − N1TL + N2SL + N2TL − N3
(3,1)

N2SL + N2TL = 2(N3

(2,2)

+ N3

).

(2,2)

− N3

= 0,

(40)
(41)

Next, since each spacelike triangle is shared by two (3,1)-tetrahedra, we have
(3,1)

N3

4
= N1SL .
3

(42)

Lastly, from identities satisfied by the two-dimensional spatial slices, one derives
3
N1SL = N2SL ,
2

1
N0 = χ((2) Σ)t + N2SL ,
2
25

(43)
(44)

where we have introduced the notation t for the number of time-slices in the triangulation.
We therefore have five linearly independent conditions on the seven variables Ni ,
leaving us with two “bulk” degrees of freedom, a situation identical to the case of
Euclidean dynamical triangulations. (The variable t does not have the same status
as the Ni , since it scales (canonically) only like a length, and not like a volume.)
2.4.2

Identities in 3+1 dimensions

Here we are interested in four-manifolds which are of the form of a product of a
compact three-manifold (3) Σ with either an open interval or a circle, that is, I × (3) Σ
or S 1 × (3) Σ. (Note that because of χ((3) Σ) = 0, we have χ(I × (3) Σ) = χ(S 1 × (3) Σ).
An example is χ(S 1 × T 3 ) ≡ χ(T 4 ) = 0.) In four dimensions, we need the entire
set (38) of ten bulk variables Ni . Let us again discuss the linear constraints among
them for the case of periodic boundary conditions in time.
There are three constraints which are inherited from the Dehn-Sommerville conditions for general four-dimensional triangulations [13, 39, 40],
N0 − N1SL − N1TL + N2SL + N2TL − N3SL − N3TL1 − N3TL2 + N4TL1 + N4TL2 = χ,
2(N1SL +N1TL ) −3(N2SL +N2TL ) +4(N3SL +N3TL1 +N3TL2 ) −5(N4TL1 +N4TL2 ) = 0,
5(N4TL1 + N4TL2 ) = 2(N3SL + N3TL1 + N3TL2 ).
(45)
The remaining constraints are special to the sliced, Lorentzian spacetimes we are
using. There are two which arise from conditions on the spacelike geometries alone
(cf. (40), (41)),
N0 − N1SL + N2SL − N3SL = 0,
N2SL = 2N3SL .

(46)

Furthermore, since each spacelike tetrahedron is shared by a pair of a (4,1)- and a
(1,4)-simplex,
(4,1)
2N3SL = N4 ,
(47)
and since each timelike tetrahedron of type (2,2) is shared by a pair of (3,2)-simplices,
we have
(3,2)
2N3TL2 = 3N4 .
(48)
In total, these are seven constraints for ten variables.

2.5

The Einstein-Hilbert action

We are now ready to construct the gravitational actions of Lorentzian dynamical
triangulations explicitly. The Einstein-Hilbert action is
Z
p
1
SM (Λ, G) =
dd ξ −g(ξ) (R(ξ) − 2Λ),
(49)
16πG M
26

where G is the gravitational coupling constant and Λ the cosmological constant. We
can now formulate (49) on a piecewise linear manifold using (20)-(22):
SM (Λ, G) =

1
16πGa2

X

σd−2 ∈ Td−2



2εσd−2 Vσd−2 − 2Λ V (σ d−2 ) ,

(50)

and by introducing the dimensionless quantities
V(σ d−2 ) = a−d V (σ d−2 ),

Vσd−2 a2−d ,

κ=

ad−2
,
16πG

λ=

2Λad
,
16πG

(51)

we can write
SM (λ, κ; T ) =

X

σd−2 ∈ Td−2



κ 2εσd−2 Vσd−2 − λ V(σ d−2 )



(52)

In each dimension (d = 2, 3, 4) we have only a finite number of building blocks and
for each building block we have explicit expressions for the volume and the deficit
angles. Thus we can find an expression for the action which can be expressed as
a sum over the number of (d−2)- and d-simplices of the various kinds times some
coefficients. Using the topological relations between the different simplices we can
replace the number of some of the (d − 2)-simplices with the number of vertices.
In this way the action becomes simple, depending only on the global number of
simplices and (d − 2)-subsimplices. We will now give the explicit expressions in
d = 2, 3 and 4 spacetime dimensions.

2.6

The action in 2d

Two-dimensional spacetime is special because we have the discretized version of the
Gauss-Bonnet theorem,
X
Vσd−2 2εσd−2 = 2πχ,
(53)
σd−2 ∈ Td−2

where χ is the Euler characteristic of the manifold (including boundaries). Thus the
Einstein term is trivial (the same for all metric configurations) when we do not allow
the spacetime topology to change. We will therefore consider only the cosmological
term
√
4α + 1
SL (λ; T ) = −λ
N2 (T ),
(54)
4
where N2 (T ) denotes the number of triangles in the triangulation T .

27

2.7

The action in three dimensions

The discretized action in three dimensions becomes (c.f. [38])
S (3) = κ

X




X
X
X
1
Vol(l) 2π−
Θ
2π−
Θ +κ
i
tetrahedra
tetrahedra
timelike

Vol(l)

spacelike

−λ

l

l

at l

X

X

Vol(3, 1) +

at l


Vol(2, 2) .

(3,1)&(1,3)−

(2,2)−

tetrahedra

tetrahedra

(55)

Performing the sums, and taking into account how many tetrahedra meet at the
individual links, one can re-express the action as a function of the bulk variables N1
and N3 , namely,
2π SL
N +
i 1
√ √

2
−i 2 2 2α + 1 3 (3,1)
−i
(2,2)
+ N3 arccos √ √
−κ N3 arcsin
i
4α + 1
i
3 4α + 1
√ 
2α + 1 
−1
(3,1)
(2,2)
TL
+κ α 2πN1 − 4N3 arccos
− 3N3 arccos
4α + 1
4α + 1


(2,2) 1 √
(3,1) 1 √
−λ N3
4α + 2 + N3
3α + 1 .
12
12

S (3)=κ

(56)

Our choice for the inverse trigonometric functions with imaginary argument avoids
branch-cut ambiguities for real, positive α. Despite its appearance, the action (56) is
real in the relevant range α > 0, as can be seen by applying elementary trigonometric
identities and the relation (42). The final result for the Lorentzian action can be
(3,1)
written as a function of three bulk variables (c.f. Sec. 2.4), for example, N1TL , N3
(2,2)
and N3 , as
√
S (3) = 2πκ αN1TL

√
2α + 1 
1
(3,1)
+ α arccos
− 3κ N3
arcsinh √ √
4α + 1
3 4α + 1
√
√

√
−1 
2 2 2α + 1
(2,2)
− 2 α arccos
arcsinh
+ 2κ N3
4α + 1
4α + 1

√
λ  (2,2) √
(3,1)
−
N
4α + 2 + N3
3α + 1 .
12 3
(57)

28

2.8

The action in four dimensions

The form of the discrete action in four dimensions is completely analogous to (55),
that is,

X
X 
X 
X
1
(4)
Θ
Vol(△)
Θ +k
Vol(△) 2π−
2π−
S
= k
i
timelike
4−simplices
spacelike
4−simplices
△

−λ

X

(4,1)&(1,4)−

tetrahedra

at △

Vol(4, 1) − λ

△

X

Vol(3, 2).

at △

(58)

(3,2)&(2,3)−

tetrahedra

Expressed in terms of the bulk variables N2 and N4 , the action reads
√
√ √
 √
2π 3 SL
3 (3,2)
−i 3 12α + 7
(4)
S =κ
N −
N
arcsin
(59)
i 4 2
4i 4
2(3α + 1)
√

κ√
3 (4,1)
−i
+
4α + 1 2πN2TL −
−
N4 arccos √ √
i
4
2 2 3α + 1

4α + 3 
−1
(3,2)
+ 3 arccos
−N4
6 arccos √ √
√
4(2α + 1)
2 2 2α + 1 3α + 1
!
√
√

8α + 3
12α + 7 
2α + 1
(4,1)
(3,2)
(4,1)
− λ N4
.
+ N4
−6N4 arccos
2(3α + 1)
96
96
We have again taken care in choosing the inverse functions of the Lorentzian angles
in (32) and (34) that make the expression (59) unambiguous. Using the manifold
identities for four-dimensional simplicial Lorentzian triangulations derived in Sec.
(3,2)
2.4, the action can be rewritten as a function of the three bulk variables N2TL , N4
(4,1)
and N4 , in a way that makes its real nature explicit,
"
√
π
(60)
S (4) = κ 4α + 1 N2TL +
2
√

1
3
2α + 1 
3
(4,1)
arcsinh √ √
N4
−√
+
− arccos
2(3α + 1)
4α + 1
2 2 3α + 1 2
√
√ √
3
3 12α + 7
(3,2)
√
−
N4
arcsinh
2(3α + 1)
4 4α + 1

!
4α + 3
3
−1
+ arccos
2 arccos √ √
√
4
4(2α + 1)
2 2 2α + 1 3α + 1
√
√


(3,2) 12α + 7
(4,1) 8α + 3
.
+ N4
−λ N4
96
96

It is straightforward to verify that this action is real for real α ≥ − 14 , and purely
7
imaginary for α ∈ IR, α ≤ − 12
. Note that this implies that we could in the
29

Lorentzian case choose to work with building blocks possessing lightlike (null) edges
(α = 0) instead of timelike edges, or even work entirely with building blocks whose
edges are all spacelike.

2.9

Rotation to Euclidean signature

The standard rotation from Lorentzian to Euclidean signature in quantum field
theory is given by
tL 7→ −itE ,

t > 0, tE > 0,

(or t < 0, tE < 0)

(61)

in the complex lower half-plane (or upper half-plane). The rotation (61) implies
Z
p
1
SL (Λ, G) =
dd ξ −g(ξ) (RL (ξ) − 2Λ)
16πG M
Z
p
i
dd ξ g(ξ) (−RE (ξ) + 2Λ)
(62)
7→ iSE (Λ, G) =
16πG M

for the Einstein-Hilbert action. This translation to Euclidean signature is of course
formal. As already explained in Sec. 1.7 above, for a given metric gµν (xi , t) there
is in general no suitable analytic continuation of this kind. However, it turns out
that our particular geometries do allow for a continuation from a piecewise linear
geometry with Lorentzian signature to one with Euclidean signature and such that
(62) is satisfied. The form this prescription takes is the one given in eq. (13) for α
not too small, as we will now show.
In our geometric notation where we have a proper time
√
√
dt = αdl, dt > 0 α > 0,
α > 0,
(63)

we see that
to a rotation α 7→ −α in the complex lower-half plane,
√(61) corresponds
√
such that −α = −i α. Treating the square roots in this way we can now perform
the analytic continuation to Euclidean signature, resulting in the length assignments
a2t = −αa2 7→ α̃a2 ,

as = a,

α̃ > 0

(64)

to “timelike” and spacelike links. After this rotation all invariant length assignments
are positive, contrary to the Lorentzian situation where we made the explicit choice
for some of the edges to be timelike with a2t < 0.10 However, while all α > 0 are
allowed in the Lorentzian case, we would like the rotated Euclidean simplices to be
realizable in flat Euclidean IRd , i.e. we want the triangle inequalities to be satisfied
for all simplices. For a triangle
√ in two dimensions this implies that α̃ > 1/4 since
else the total length 2at = 2 α̃a of the two “timelike” sides of the triangle is less
10

This was not strictly necessary - in Lorentzian signature one can also have building blocks all
of whose links are space- or timelike.

30

than the length as = a of the spacelike side. Similar constraints exist in three and
four dimensions, namely,
d=2:
d=3:
d=4:

1
4
1
α̃ >
2
r
α̃ >

α̃ >

7
.
12
(65)

Assuming these constraints on the values of α, α̃ to be satisfied, we can now rotate
the Lorentzian actions to Euclidean signature.
2.9.1

The Euclidean action in 2d

Using the prescription given above, the Lorentzian action (54) is readily rotated to
Euclidean signature, resulting in
√
4α̃ − 1
N2 (T ).
(66)
SE (T ) = λ
4
We have explicitly
SL (T ; α) → SL (T, −α) = iSE (T ; α̃),
2.9.2

α = α̃ > 0.

(67)

The Euclidean action in three dimensions

The analytic continuation of (57) becomes
√
(3)
SE (α̃) = −2πκ α̃N1TL

√
2α̃ − 1 
1
(3,1)
+ 3k α arccos
+ N3
−3κ arcsin √ √
4α̃ − 1
3 4α̃ − 1
√ √

√
2 2 2α̃ − 11
1 
(2,2)
2κ arcsin
+ N3
+ 4κ α̃ arccos
4α̃ − 1
4α̃ − 1

λ (3,1) √
λ  (2,2) √
4α̃ − 2 + N3
3α̃ − 1 .
(68)
+
N
12 3
12
The terms which are multiplied by the coupling constant κ constitute the Einstein
term while the terms multiplied by λ make up the cosmological term. Again one
has explicitly
SL (T ; α) → SL (T, −α) = iSE (T ; α̃),

α = α̃ > 0.

(69)

The expression (68) simplifies considerably when α̃ = 1, in which case all threesimplices (tetrahedra) are identical and equilateral, yielding
√
2
1
(3)
λ).
(70)
SE (α̃ = 1) = −2πκN1 + N3 (6κ arccos +
3
12
31

One recognizes arccos 31 as the dihedral angle of an equilateral tetrahedron, and the
term 2πN1 as coming from the 2π which enters in the definition of the deficit angle
associated with a link. One can replace the number of links by the number of vertices
using (40) and (41), obtaining
N0 − N1 + N3 = 0.
2.9.3

(71)

The Euclidean action in four dimensions

Finally, the analytic continuation of (60) becomes
"


√
1 (4,1)
(3,2)
SE = −κ 4α̃ − 1 π N0 − χ + N4 + N4
+
(72)
2
√


1
3
2α̃ − 1
3
(4,1)
arcsin √ √
N4
−√
+
+ arccos
6α̃ − 2
4α̃ − 1
2 2 3α̃ − 1 2
√

6α̃ − 5 3
3
4α̃ − 3
(3,2)
arccos
N4
+ √
+ arccos
+
6α̃ − 2 4
8α̃ − 4
4 4α̃ − 1
√
√
# 

1
3
(4,1) 8α̃−3
(3,2) 12α̃−7
.
arccos √ √
+N4
+λ N4
√
2
96
96
2 2 2α̃−1 3α̃−1

In this expression, χ is the Euler characteristic of the piecewise flat four-manifold
and α̃ ≡ −α denotes the positive ratio between the two types of squared edge
lengths after the Euclideanization. In order to satisfy the triangle inequalities, we
need α̃ > 7/12 as noted above. For simplicity, we have assumed that the manifold is
compact without boundaries. In the presence of boundaries, appropriate boundary
terms must be added to the action.
For the simulations, a convenient alternative parametrization of the action is
given by
(4,1)

SE = −(κ0 + 6∆)N0 + κ4 (N4

(3,2)

+ N4

(4,1)

) + ∆(2N4

(3,2)

+ N4

),

(73)

where the functional dependence of the κi and ∆ on the bare inverse Newton constant
κ, the bare cosmological constant λ and α̃ can be computed from (72). We have
dropped the constant term proportional to χ, because it will be irrelevant for the
quantum dynamics. Note that ∆ = 0 corresponds to α̃ = 1, and ∆ is therefore a
measure of the asymmetry between the lengths of the spatial and timelike edges of
the simplicial geometry if we insist that (73) represents the Regge version of the
Einstein-Hilbert action on the piecewise linear geometry. Given κ0 , κ4 and ∆ one
can go from (73) to (72) and find α̃ (and κ and λ). In Fig. 2 we have shown such
an inversion. It corresponds to values of κ0 , κ4 and ∆ actually used in computer
simulations which we will discuss later. This is why the inversion is only performed
for a finite number of points which are connected by linear interpolation. More
precisely, they correspond to a given value of κ0 (κ0 = 2.2) and various values of ∆.
Given κ0 and ∆, the value of κ4 used is the so-called critical value κ4 (κ0 , ∆), where
the statistical system becomes critical, as will be discussed in detail below.
32

1
0.95
0.9
0.85

α

0.8
0.75
0.7
0.65
0.6
0.55
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

∆

Figure 2: The asymmetry factor α, plotted as a function of ∆, for κ0 = 2.2. The horizontal
line is α̃ = 7/12, the lowest kinematically allowed value of α̃ (see (64)), where the (3,2)-simplices
degenerate because of a saturation of a triangle inequality.

3

The transfer matrix

We now have all the necessary prerequisites to study the amplitude or (after rotation
to Euclidean signature) the partition function for pure gravity for our CDT model,
that is,
X e−S(T )
X eiS(T )
→
.
(74)
Z =
C(T
)
C(T
)
T
T

The class of triangulations appearing in the sums are as described above corresponding to our CDT model. The weight factor is the standard phase factor given by the
classical action (or the corresponding Boltzmann factor after rotation to Euclidean
signature), except when the triangulation has a special symmetry. If the symmetry group (also called the automorphism group) of the triangulation T has C(T )
elements we divide by C(T ). One may think of this factor as the remnant of the
division by the volume of the diffeomorphism group Diff(M) that would occur in a
formal gauge-fixed continuum expression for Z. Its effect is to suppress geometries
possessing special symmetries. This is analogous to what happens in the continuum
where the diffeomorphism orbits through metrics with special isometries are smaller
than the “typical” orbits, and are therefore of measure zero in the quotient space
Metrics(M)/Diff(M).
One way to see how the nontrivial measure factor C(T )−1 arises is as follows.
The triangulations we have been discussing so far can be associated with unlabeled
graphs. Working with labeled triangulations is the discrete counterpart of introducing coordinate systems in the continuum, and is often convenient from a practical
point of view (for example, when storing geometric data in a computer). One possibility is to label the vertices. A link is then identified by a pair of labels, a triangle by
33

three labels, etc. If we have a triangulation T with N0 (T ) vertices, there are N0 (T )!
possible ways to label the same triangulation. Two labeled triangulations are said
to represent the same abstract triangulation if there is a one-to-one map between
the labels, such that also links are mapped to links, triangles to triangles, etc. If
we work with labeled triangulations, we only want to count physically distinct ones
once and therefore want to divide by N0 (T )!. This can be thought of as the discrete
analogue of dividing by the volume of the diffeomorphism group Diff(M), since also
in the standard continuum formulation we only want to count geometries, not the
number of parametrizations of the same geometry. We can write
Z=

X
Tl

X 1
1
e−S(Tl ) =
e−S(T ) ,
N0 (Tl )!
C(T
)
T

(75)

where the first summation is over labeled triangulations, while the second sum is
over abstract triangulations. The reason for the presence of the factor C(T ) in the
expression on the right is that any symmetries of the graph T make the cancellation
of the factor N0 (T )! incomplete.
As an example, consider the simplest triangulation of the two-sphere, as the
boundary of a single tetrahedron, which contains four triangles, six links and four
vertices. Let us label the vertices 1 to 4. The triangulation is defined assigning
(unordered) labels (i, j), i 6= j, to the links, and (unordered) labels (i, j, k), i 6= j 6=
k, to the triangles, i, j, k taking values 1 to 4. We can perform 4! permutations of
the labeling of the vertices. However, no matter which of the 4! permutations we
consider we end up with the same labeled triangulation since the list of vertices,
links and triangles will be identical except for a possible ordering. Thus C(T ) = 24.
The most natural boundary conditions for Z in our discretized model are given
by specifying the spatial piecewise linear geometries at given initial and final proper
times, which we take as 0 and t. We assume, as we have done above, that the slices
at constant proper time t are by construction spacelike and of fixed topology, and
defined by (unlabeled) (d − 1)-dimensional triangulations. Given an initial and a
final geometry, in the form of triangulations Td−1 (1) and Td−1 (2), we may think of
the corresponding amplitude Z as the matrix element of the quantum propagator of
the system, evaluated between two states |Td−1 (1)i and |Td−1 (2)i. Since we regard
distinct spatial triangulations Td−1 (i) as physically inequivalent, a natural scalar
product is given by
hTd−1 (1)|Td−1 (2)i =
X

Td−1

1
C(Td−1 (1))

δTd−1 (1),Td−1 (2) ,

C(Td−1 ) |Td−1 ihTd−1 | = 1̂.

(76)
(77)

In line with our previous reasoning, we have included a symmetry factor C(Td−1 )
for the spatial triangulations.
34

In the regularized context, it is natural to have a cutoff on the allowed size of
the spatial slices so that their volume is ≤ N. The spatial discrete volume Vol(Td−1 )
is simply the number of (d − 1)-simplices in a slice of constant integer t, Nd−1 (t)
(times a factor proportional to ad−1 which we will not write). We define the finitedimensional Hilbert space H (N ) as the space spanned by the vectors {|Td−1 i, Nmin ≤
Nd−1 (T ) ≤ N}, endowed with the scalar product (77). The lower bound Nmin is the
minimal size of a spatial triangulation of the given topology satisfying the simplicial
manifold conditions. It is believed that the number of states in H (N ) is exponentially
bounded as a function of N [41].
For given volume-cutoff N, we can now associate with each time-step ∆t = 1 a
transfer matrix T̂N describing the evolution of the system from t to t+1, with matrix
elements
X
1
hTd−1 (2)|T̂N (α)|Td−1 (1)i =
e−∆Sα (Td ) .
(78)
C(Td )
Td : Td−1 (1)→Td−1 (2)

The sum is taken over all distinct interpolating d-dimensional triangulations Td
from Td−1 (1) → Td−1 (2) of the “sandwich” with boundary geometries Td−1 (1) and
Td−1 (2), contributing ∆S to the action, according to (68), (72). The “propagator”
GN (Td−1 (1), Td−1 (2); t) for arbitrary time intervals t is obtained by iterating the
transfer matrix t times,
GN (Td−1 (1), Td−1 (2); t) = hTd−1 (2)|T̂Nt |Td−1 (1)i,

(79)

and satisfies the semigroup property
GN (Td−1 (1), Td−1 (2); t1 + t2 ) =
X
C(T ) GN (Td−1 (1), Td−1 ; t1 ) GN (Td−1 , Td−1 (2); t2 ),

(80)

Td−1

where the sum is over all spatial geometries (of bounded volume) at some intermediate time. Because of the appearance of different symmetry factors in (78)
and (80) it is at first not obvious why the composition property (80) should hold.
In order to understand that it does, one has to realize that by continuity and by
virtue of the manifold property there are no nontrivial automorphisms of a sandwich
T = Td−1 (1) → Td−1 (2) that leave its boundary invariant. It immediately follows
that the (finite) automorphism group of T must be a subgroup of the automorphism
groups of both of the boundaries, and that therefore C(T ) must be a divisor of both
C(Td−1 (1)) and C(Td−1 (2)). It is then straightforward to verify that the factor C(T )
appearing in the composition law (80) ensures that the resulting geometries appear
exactly with the symmetry factor they should have according to (78).
If d = 2 one can solve analytically for the transfer matrix and the propagator as
we will discuss in detail below.

35

3.1

Properties of the transfer matrix

In this section we will establish some desirable properties of the transfer matrix
T̂N (α), defined in (78), which will enable us to define a self-adjoint Hamiltonian
operator. In statistical mechanical models the Hamilton operator ĥ is usually defined
by
1
T̂ = e−aĥ , i.e. ĥ = − ln T̂ ,
(81)
a
where a denotes the lattice spacing in time-direction. A set of sufficient conditions
on T̂N guaranteeing the existence of a well-defined quantum Hamiltonian ĥ are that
the transfer matrix should satisfy
(a) symmetry, that is, T̂N† = T̂N . This is the same as self-adjointness since the
Hilbert space H (N ) which T̂N acts on is finite-dimensional. It is necessary if
the Hamiltonian is to have real eigenvalues.
(b) Strict positivity is required in addition to (a), that is, all eigenvalues must be
greater than zero; otherwise, ĥN = −a−1 log T̂N does not exist.
(c) Boundedness, that is, in addition to (a) and (b), T̂N should be bounded above
to ensure that the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian are bounded below, thus
defining a stable physical system.
Establishing (a)-(c) suffices to show that our discretized systems are well-defined as
regularized statistical models. This of course does not imply that they will possess
interesting continuum limits and that these properties will necessarily persist in the
limit (as would be desirable). On the other hand, it is difficult to imagine how
the continuum limit could have such properties unless also the limiting sequence of
regularized models did.
All of the above properties are indeed satisfied for the Lorentzian model in d = 2
where moreover the quantum Hamiltonian and its complete spectrum in the continuum limit are known explicitly [42, 43], as we will discuss below. In d > 2 we
are able to prove a slightly weaker statement than the above, namely, we can verify
(a)-(c) for the two-step transfer matrix T̂N2 . This is still sufficient to guarantee the
existence of a well-defined Hamiltonian. Note that self-adjointness of the continuum
Hamiltonian Ĥ implies a unitary time evolution operator e−iĤT if the continuum
proper time T is analytically continued. As was mentioned in the introduction this
is an important point because we do not at the present stage know the effective
field theory which is associated with a conjectured UV fixed point. This effective
field theory could contain an arbitrary number of higher-derivative terms and the
question of unitarity becomes an issue, as discussed in Sec. 1. The existence of a
unitary time evolution operator ensures unitarity.
One verifies the symmetry of the transfer matrix by inspection of the explicit
form of the matrix elements (78). The “sandwich actions” ∆Sα as functions of
the boundary geometries Td−1 (1), Td−1 (2) in three and four dimensions can be read
36

off from (57) and (60). To make the symmetry explicit, one may simply rewrite
these actions as separate functions of the simplicial building blocks and their mirror
images under time-reflection (in case they are different). Likewise, the symmetry
factor C(T ) and the counting of interpolating geometries in the sum over T are
invariant under exchange of the in- and out-states, |Td−1 (1)i and |Td−1 (2)i.
Next, we will discuss the reflection (or Osterwalder-Schrader) positivity [20] of
our model, with respect to reflection at planes of constant integer and half-integer
time (see also [44] and references therein). These notions can be defined in a straightforward way in the Lorentzian model because it possesses a distinguished notion of
(discrete proper) time. Reflection positivity implies the positivity of the transfer
matrix, T̂N ≥ 0.
“Site reflection” denotes the reflection θs with respect to a spatial hypersurface
of constant integer-t (containing “sites”, i.e. vertices), for example, t = 0, where it
takes the form
θs : t → −t.
(82)

Let us accordingly split any triangulation T along this hypersurface, so that T − is
the triangulation with t ≤ 0 and T + the one with t ≥ 0, and T − ∩T + = Td−1 (t = 0) ≡
0
0
Td−1
, where Td−1
denotes a spatial triangulation at t = 0. Consider now functions
F that depend only on T + (that is, on all the connectivity data specifying T +
uniquely, in some parametrization of our choice). Site-reflection positivity means
the positivity of the Euclidean expectation value
h(θs F )F i ≥ 0,

(83)

for all such functions F . The action of θs on a function F (T + ) is defined by antilinearity, (θs F )(T − ) := F̄ (θs (T − )). By virtue of the composition property (80), we
can write
X 1
h(θs F )F i = Z −1
(θs F )F e−S(T )
(84)
C(T
)
T
X F (T + )
X (θs F )(T − )
X
+
−S(T − )
0
e
e−S(T )
C(Td−1
)
= Z −1
−
+
C(T )
C(T )
0
T+
T−
Td−1

= Z −1

X

0
Td−1

T + (t=0)=T 0
d−1

T − (t=0)=T 0
d−1

0
0
0
C(Td−1
)F̄ (Td−1
)F (Td−1
) ≥ 0.

The equality in going to the last line holds because both the action and the symmetry
factor C depend on “outgoing” and “incoming” data in the same way (for example,
on (m,n)-simplices in the same way as on (n,m)-simplices). Note that the standard
procedure of extracting a scalar product and a Hilbert space from (84) is consistent
with our earlier definition (77). One associates (in a many-to-one fashion) functions
F (T + ) with elements ΨF of a Hilbert space at fixed time t with scalar product h·, ·i,
37

where hΨF , ΨG i = h(θs F )Gi [20]. A set of representative functions which reproduces
the states and orthogonality relations (77) is given by
( p
1/ C(Td−1 ), T + (t = 0) = Td−1
+
FTd−1 (T ) =
(85)
0
otherwise,
′′ i.
′
)FTd−1
which can be verified by an explicit computation of the expectation values h(θs FTd−1
We have therefore proved site-reflection positivity of our model. This is already
enough to construct a Hamiltonian from the square of the transfer matrix T̂N (see
eq. (89) below), since it implies the positivity of T̂N2 [44].
Proving in addition link-reflection positivity (which would imply positivity of the
“elementary” transfer matrix, and not only of T̂N2 ) turns out to be more involved. A
“link reflection” is the reflection θl at a hypersurface of constant half-integer-t, for
example, t = 1/2,
θl : t → 1 − t.
(86)

To show link-reflection positivity in our model we would need to demonstrate that
h(θl F )F i ≥ 0,

(87)

where F is now any function that depends only on the part T + of the triangulation
T at times later or equal to 1. We can again write down the expectation value,
XX
0
1
0
1
C(Td−1
)C(Td−1
)GN (Td−1
, Td−1
; 1)×
h(θl F )F i = Z −1
1
0
Td−1
Td−1

X

(θs F )(T − ) −S(T − )
e
C(T − )

X

F (T + ) −S(T + )
e
.
C(T + )

(88)

T+
T + (t=1)=T 1
d−1

T−
T − (t=0)=T 0
d−1

In order to show that this is positive, one should try to rewrite the right-hand side
as a sum of positive terms. The proof of this is straightforward in d = 2 (see
Appendix 2 for details), but it is considerably more difficult to understand what
happens in higher dimensions. The reason for this is the nontrivial way in which the
various types of simplicial building blocks fit together in between slices of constant
integer-t. In a way, this is a desirable situation since it means that there is a more
complicated “interaction” among the simplices. It is perfectly possible that T̂N
itself is not positive for d = 3, 4. This may depend both on the values of the bare
couplings and on the detailed choices we have made as part of our discretization.
(By contrast, it is clear from our proof of site-reflection positivity that this property
is largely independent of the choice of building blocks.)
Nevertheless, as already mentioned above, site-reflection positivity is perfectly
sufficient for the construction of a well-defined Hamiltonian. So far, we have only
shown that the eigenvalues of the squared transfer matrix are positive. In order for
the Hamiltonian
1
ĥ′N := − log T̂N2
(89)
2a
38

to exist, we must achieve strict positivity. We do not expect that the Hilbert space
H (N ) contains any zero-eigenvectors of T̂N since this would entail a “hidden” symmetry of the discretized theory. It is straightforward to see that none of the basis
vectors |Td−1 i can be zero-eigenvectors. However, we cannot in P
principle exclude
“accidental” zero-eigenvectors of the form of linear combinations i αi |Td−1 (i)i. In
case such vectors exist, we will simply adopt the standard procedure of defining
(N )
our physical Hilbert space as the quotient space Hph = H (N ) /N (N ) , where N (N )
denotes the span of all zero-eigenvectors.
Lastly, the boundedness of the transfer matrix (and therefore also of T̂N2 ) for finite spatial volumes N follows from the fact that (i) there is only a finite number of
eigenvalues since the Hilbert space H (N ) is finite-dimensional, and (ii) each matrix
element hTd−1 (2)|T̂N |Td−1 (1)i has a finite value, because it has the form of a finite
sum of terms e−S /C(T ). (Note that this need not be true in general if we abandoned the simplicial manifold restrictions, because then the number of interpolating
geometries for given, fixed boundary geometries would not necessarily be finite.)

4

A two-dimensional toy model

The two-dimensional CDT model is easy to solve by combinatorial methods [45, 46].
Since we do not allow topology changes the action is simply given by the cosmological
term, eq. (53), or after rotation to Euclidean signature, eq. (66).
In the following we will assume that we have performed the rotation to Euclidean
signature, and we will in addition put α̃ = 1 since a different α̃ clearly can be absorbed
in redefinition of the cosmological constant.
Our manifold has the topology of a cylinder and we want to find the “propagator”
defined by eq. (79). The “triangulations” of the boundaries are simply specified by
the number of links constituting the boundaries. This is in agreement with the
continuum description: the geometry of the boundary S 1 is entirely specified by its
length. In our discretized theory the length of a boundary will be L(l) = a · l where
l denotes the number of links of the boundary. Similarly,
with α̃ = 1, the volume
√ 2
of spacetime (the area of the surface) will be V = 3a /4 · n, where n denotes the
number of triangles of the triangulation. The action, i.e. the cosmological term, for
a given triangulation T with n(T ) triangles, will then be (see (66))
√ 2
√ 2
3a
3a
n(T ) = λ n(T ), λ ≡ Λ0
,
(90)
S = Λ0
4
4
where Λ0 is the bare dimensionful cosmological coupling constant, while
√ λ is a convenient dimensionless coupling constant (which differs by a factor 3/4 from the
one used in (66)). Shortly, we will define the renormalized dimensionful cosmological
constant.
As stated above the boundaries will be characterized by integers l1 and l2 , the
number of vertices or links at the two boundaries. The path integral amplitude
39

for the “propagation” from geometry l1 to l2 will be the sum over all interpolating
surfaces of the kind described above, with a weight given by
e−S(T ) = e−λn(T ) ,

(91)
(1)

according to (90). Let us call the corresponding amplitude Gλ (l1 , l2 ). Thus we
have
(1)
Gλ (l1 , l2 ; t)

=

∞
X

(1)

l=1

(1)
Gλ (l1 , l2 ; 1)

=

1
l1

(1)

Gλ (l1 , l; 1) l Gλ (l, l2 , t − 1),
X

e−λ

Pl1

i=1 ki

,

(92)
(93)

{k1 ,...,kl1 }

where the factors l and l1 appearing in (92) and (93) are the factors C(T ) appearing
in (80) and (78), while the ki is the number of timelike links connected to vertex i
on the entrance loop (see Fig. 1, where it will be clear that the sum of ki ’s is just
the total number of triangles in the “slab” interpolating between the two boundaries
of lengths l1 and l). From a combinatorial point of view it is convenient to mark a
vertex on the entrance loop in order to get rid of these factors, that is,
(1)

Gλ (l1 , l2 ; t) ≡ l1 Gλ (l1 , l2 ; t).

(94)

Gλ (l1 , l2 ; 1) is of course precisely the transfer matrix defined by (78) (up to the factor
C(T )), satisfying
X
Gλ (l1 , l; t1 ) Gλ (l, l2 ; t2 )
(95)
Gλ (l1 , l2 , t1 + t2 ) =
l

Gλ (l1 , l2 ; t + 1) =

X

Gλ (l1 , l; 1) Gλ (l, l2 ; t).

(96)

l

It is defined by summing over all piecewise linear geometries of a “slab” like the one
shown in Fig. 1 with fixed lengths of the boundaries.
Knowing Gλ (l1 , l2 ; 1) allows us to find Gλ (l1 , l2 ; t) by iterating (96) t times. This
program is conveniently carried out by introducing the generating function for the
numbers Gλ (l1 , l2 ; t),
X
Gλ (x, y; t) ≡
xk y l Gλ (k, l; t),
(97)
k,l

which we can use to rewrite (95) as
I
Gλ (x, y; t1 + t2 ) =

dz
Gλ (x, z −1 ; t1 )Gλ (z, y; t2 ),
2πiz

(98)

where the contour should be chosen to include the singularities in the complex z–
plane of Gλ (x, z −1 ; t1 ) but not those of Gλ (z, y; t2 ).
40

One can either view the introduction of Gλ (x, y; t) as a purely technical device or
take x and y as related to boundary cosmological constants. Let λi and λf denote
dimensionless lattice boundary cosmological constants, such that if the entrance
boundary consists of k and the exit loop of l links, the lattice boundary action will
be
(b)
(b)
Si = λi k = Λ0i Li , Sf = λf l = Λ0f Lf .
(99)
In (99) we have introduced also dimensionful bare lattice boundary cosmological
constants Λ0i = λi /a and Λ0f = λf /a, as well as continuum boundary lengths Li = k a
and Lf = l a. We now write
x = e−λi = e−Λi a ,

y = e−λf = e−Λf a ,

(100)

such that xk = e−λi k becomes the exponential of the boundary cosmological term,
and similarly for y l = e−λf l . Let us for notational convenience define
g = e−λ .

(101)

For the technical purpose of counting we view x, y and g as variables in the complex
plane. In general the function
G(x, y; g; t) ≡ Gλ (x, y; t)

(102)

will be analytic in a neighbourhood of (x, y, g) = (0, 0, 0).
From the definitions (93) and (94) it follows by standard techniques of generating
functions that we may associate a factor g with each triangle, a factor x with each
vertex on the entrance loop and a factor y with each vertex on the exit loop, leading
to
!k
∞
∞
∞
X
X
X
g 2xy
(gx)k =
(gy)l −
. (103)
gx
G(x, y; g; 1) =
(1
−
gx)(1
−
gx
−
gy)
k=0
l=0
k=0
Formula (103) is simply a book-keeping device for all possible ways of evolving from
an entrance loop of any length in one step to an exit loop of any length, i.e. a sum
over all possible configurations of the kind shown in Fig. 1. The subtraction of the
term 1/(1 − gx) has been performed to exclude the degenerate cases where either
the entrance or the exit loop is of length zero. The asymmetry between x and y
in (103) is due to the marking of a vertex belonging to the entrance loop. We can
undo Rthe marking by dividing Gλ (l1 , l2 ; 1) by l1 . This operation translates to acting
with dx
on G(x, y; g; 1) leading to the symmetric
x
h 1 − gx − gy i
G(1) (x, y; g; 1) = − ln
.
(104)
(1 − gx)(1 − gy)
From (103) and eq. (98), with t1 = 1, we obtain
G(x, y; g; t) =

g
gx
G(
, y; g; t − 1).
1 − gx
1 − gx
41

(105)

This equation can be iterated and the solution written as
G(x, y; g; t) =

2
g 2 xy F12 (x)F22 (x) · · · Ft−1
(x)
,
[1 − gFt−1 (x)][1 − gFt−1 (x) − gy]

(106)

where Ft (x) is defined iteratively by
Ft (x) =

g
,
1 − gFt−1 (x)

F0 (x) = x.

(107)

Let F denote the fixed point of this iterative equation. By standard techniques one
readily obtains
p
1 − 1 − 4g 2
1 − xF + F 2t−1 (x − F )
, F =
.
(108)
Ft (x) = F
1 − xF + F 2t+1 (x − F )
2g
Inserting (108) in eq. (106), we can write
F 2t (1 − F 2 )2 xy
(109)
(At − Bt x)(At − Bt (x + y) + Ct xy)
F 2t (1 − F 2 )2 xy
h
ih
i ,
=
2t+1
2t
(1−xF )−F
(F−x) (1−xF )(1−yF )−F (F−x)(F−y)

G(x, y; g, t)=

where the time-dependent coefficients are given by
At = 1 − F 2t+2 ,

Bt = F (1 − F 2t ),

Ct = F 2 (1 − F 2t−2 ).

(110)

The combined region of convergence of the expansion in powers g k xl y m, valid for all
t is
1
|g| < , |x| < 1, |y| < 1.
(111)
2
The asymmetry between x and y in the expression (109) is due to the marking of
(1)
the entrance loop. Thus the corresponding expression for Gλ (x, y; t) is symmetric.
We can compute Gλ (l1 , l2 ; t) from G(x, y; g; t) by a (discrete) inverse Laplace
transformation
I
I
dy 1 1
dx
Gλ (l1 , l2 ; t) =
G(x, y; g; t),
(112)
2πix
2πiy xl1 y l2
where the contours should be chosen in the region where G(x, y; g; t) is analytic,
Gλ (l1 , l2 ; t) = l1



Bt
At

l1+l2

min(l1 ,l2 )

X
k=0


k
(l1 +l2 −k−1)!
At Ct
− 2
,
k!(l1 −k)!(l2 −k)!
Bt

(113)

which, as expected, is symmetric with respect to l1 and l2 after division by l1 (l1 , l2 >
0 are assumed).
In the next section we will give explicit expressions for Gλ (l1 , l2 ; t) and Gλ (x, y; t)
in a certain continuum limit.
42

4.1

The continuum limit

The path integral formalism we are using here is very similar to the one used to represent the free particle as a sum over paths. Also there one performs a summation
over geometric objects (the paths), and the path integral itself serves as the propagator. From the particle case it is known that the bare mass undergoes an additive
renormalization (even for the free particle), and that the bare propagator is subject
to a wave-function renormalization (see [39] for a review). The same is true here.
The coupling constants with positive mass dimension, i.e. the cosmological constant
and the boundary cosmological constants, undergo additive renormalizations, while
the propagator itself undergoes a multiplicative wave-function renormalization. We
therefore expect the bare dimensionless coupling constants λ, λi and λf to behave
as
λ = λc + Λa2 , λi = λci + Xa, λf = λcf + Y a,
(114)
where Λ, X, Y denote the renormalized dimensionful cosmological
and boundary
√
cosmological constants and where we have absorbed a factor 3/4 in the definition
of Λ.
If we introduce the notation
gc = e−λc ,

c

xc = e−λi ,

c

yc = e−λf ,

(115)

for critical values of the coupling constants, it follows from (100) and (101) that
2

g = gc e−a Λ ,

x = xc e−a X ,

y = yc e−a Y .

(116)

The wave-function renormalization will appear as a multiplicative cutoff dependent
factor in front of the “bare” propagator G(x, y; g; t),
GΛ (X, Y ; T ) = lim aη G(x, y; g; t),
a→0

(117)

where T = a t, and where the critical exponent η should be chosen such that the
right-hand side of eq. (117) exists. In general this will only be possible for particular
choices of gc , xc and yc in (117).
The basic relation (95) can survive the limit (117) only if η = 1, since we have
assumed that the boundary lengths L1 and L2 have canonical dimensions and satisfy
Li = a li .
From eqs. (108), (109) and (110) it is clear that we can only obtain a nontrivial
continuum limit if |F | → 1 and the natural choice is to take gc = 1/2. With this
choice the continuum propagator (117) is defined by the approach to the critical
point, and this approach takes place from within the region of convergence of the
power series defining G(x, y; g; t) as function of g. Corresponding to gc = 1/2 we
have λc = ln 2.
From (109) it follows that we can only get macroscopic loops in the limit a →
0 if we simultaneously take x, y → 1. Thus the critical values are xc = yc = 1,
corresponding to critical points λci = λcf = 0 and
λi = X a,

λf = Y a.
43

(118)

Summarizing, we have
1
2
g = e−Λa ,
2

x = e−Xa ,

y = e−aY ,

(119)

and with these definitions it is straightforward to perform the continuum limit of
G(x, y; g, t) as (x, y, g) → (xc , yc , gc ) = (1, 1, 1/2), yielding
√

4Λ e−2 ΛT
√
√
GΛ (X, Y ; T ) = √
( Λ + X) + e−2 ΛT ( Λ − X)
1
√
√
√
√
× √
.
( Λ + X)( Λ + Y ) − e−2 ΛT ( Λ − X)( Λ − Y )

(120)

From GΛ (X, Y ; T ) we can finally calculate GΛ (L1 , L2 ; T ), the continuum amplitude for propagation from a loop of length L1 , with one marked point, at time-slice
T = 0 to a loop of length L2 at time-slice T , by an inverse Laplace transformation,
Z i∞
Z i∞
GΛ (L1 , L2 ; T ) =
dX
dY eXL1 eY L2 GΛ (X, Y ; T ).
(121)
−i∞

−i∞

This transformation can be viewed as the limit of (112) for a → 0. The continuum
version of (98) thus reads
Z i∞
GΛ (X, Y ; T1 + T2 ) =
dZ GΛ (X, −Z; T1 ) GΛ (Z, Y ; T2 ),
(122)
−i∞

where it is understood that the complex contour of integration should be chosen to
the left of singularities of GΛ (X, −Z; T1 ), but to the right of those of GΛ (Z, Y, T2 ).
By inverse Laplace transform of formula (120) we obtain
√
√
√

 √
e−[coth ΛT ] Λ(L1 +L2 ) ΛL1 L2
2 ΛL1 L2
√
√
,
(123)
GΛ (L1 , L2 ; T ) =
I1
L2
sinh ΛT
sinh ΛT
where I1 (x) is a modified Bessel function of the first kind. The asymmetry between
L1 and L2 arises because the entrance loop has a marked point, whereas the exit
loop has not. The amplitude with both loops marked is obtained by multiplying
with L2 , while the amplitude with no marked loops is obtained after dividing (123)
by L1 . The highly nontrivial expression (123) agrees with the loop propagator
obtained from a bona-fide continuum calculation in proper-time gauge of pure twodimensional gravity by Nakayama [42].
The important point we want to emphasize here is that the additive renormalization of the cosmological constant is an entropic effect when calculated after rotation
to Euclidean signature. In fact, we can write the propagator (102) as
G(x, y, g; t) =

X

xk y l g n

k,l,n

44

X

T (k,l,n)

1
,
C(T )

(124)

where the summation is over all causal triangulations T (k, l, n) consisting of n triangles and with the two boundaries made of k and l links. The critical point is
gc = 1/2. That can only be the case because the number of (causal) triangulations constructed from n triangles grows exponentially as en ln 2 . The continuum
renormalized cosmological constant, as defined by eq. (119), emerges when taking
the difference between the value of the action for a geometry made of n triangles
and the entropy of the configurations with a given action (which in this case is proportional to the number of triangles n). More precisely, let the number of causal
triangulations which can be constructed from n triangles be
N (n) = f (n) eλc n ,

λc = ln 2,

(125)

where f (n) is a pre-factor growing slower than exponentially, and which can also
depend on the boundary cosmological constants x, y, a dependence we will suppress
here. We can now write eq. (124) as
X
G(λ) =
f (n) e−(λ−λc )n , g ≡ e−λ .
(126)
n

and using (114), written as
λ = λc + Λa2 ,

(127)
√
and the continuum area A = na2 (again disposing of a factor 3/4 for notational
simplicity), eq. (126) can now be written as
Z ∞
G(Λ) ∝
dA f (A/a2 ) e−ΛA ,
(128)
0

with the continuum action ΛA and the nontrivial physics contained in the function
f (A/a2 ).
Let us end this subsection by highlighting the entropic interpretation of (124).
This formula tells us that the theory is nothing but entropy of geometries – in
the sense of counting geometric “microstates”. The partition function (or propertime propagator) G(x, y, g; t) is simply the generating function of the number of
geometries with fixed area and boundary length. One could object that this is not
so surprising, since the action in two dimensions is sufficiently simple to allow for
this interpretation. However, the same is true for DT and CDT in three and four
dimensions. It is again a consequence of the geometric nature of the Einstein-Hilbert
action, together with the simple form it takes on the DT piecewise linear geometries.
It is nevertheless surprising that even in four dimensions one has an entirely entropic
expression for the partition function of CDT quantum gravity, namely, eq. (195)
below, which is almost identical to (124). If one were able to count the number of
four-dimensional triangulations (as we did for the two-dimensional triangulations),
one would have an analytical expression for the four-dimensional CDT partition
function!
45

4.2

The transfer matrix in two dimensions

If we interpret the propagator GΛ (L1 , L2 ; T ) as the matrix element between two
boundary states of a Hamiltonian evolution in “time” T ,
GΛ (L1 , L2 ; T ) = hL2 |e−ĤT |L1 i

(129)

the propagator has to satisfy the heat kernel equation
∂
GΛ (L1 , L2 ; T ) = −Ĥ(L1 )GΛ (L1 , L2 ; T ).
∂T

(130)

From eq. (105) we can in the limit a → 0, using (119), directly read off the Laplacetransformed eq. (130),
∂
GΛ (X, Y ; T ) = −Ĥ(X)GΛ (X, Y ; T );
∂T

Ĥ(X) =

∂
(X 2 − Λ).
∂X

(131)

An inverse Laplace transformation leads to
Ĥ(L,

∂2
∂
) = −L 2 + ΛL.
∂L
∂L

(132)

However, a little care should be exercised when looking at a matrix element like
(129), since we have for combinatorial convenience used a different measure on the
entrance boundary (where we marked a point) and the exit boundary where no
point was marked. If we want to follow the conventions of Sec. 3 where we worked
with boundaries without markings, the labeling of the boundary triangulations are
simply |li, where l is the number of links, and in the continuum limit the relations
(76) and (77) become
Z ∞
1
dL L |LihL| = 1̂, hL2 |L1 i =
δ(L1 − L2 ).
(133)
L1
0
This leads to an expansion of functions on [0, ∞] according to
Z
|φi = dL |Li Lφ(L), φ(L) = hL|φi,

(134)

with the measure given by
hψ|φi =

Z

dL L ψ ∗ (L)φ(L).

(135)

Thus the Hamiltonian (132) really acts on functions Lφ(L). Rewriting it as a Hermitian operator on functions φ(L) with the measure (135) leads to the Hamiltonian
Ĥ (1) (L,

∂2
∂
) = − 2 L + ΛL,
∂L
∂L
46

hĤψ|φi = hψ|Ĥφi

(136)

for the propagator of unmarked loops. We thus have
(1)

(1)

GΛ (L1 , L2 ; T ) = hL2 |e−T Ĥ |L1 i =

1
GΛ (L1 , L2 ; T ),
L1

(137)

where the measure used on both entrance and exit loops is given by (134) and (135).
As discussed in Sec. 3 one obtains the discretized Hamiltonian from the logarithm
of the transfer matrix, see eq. (81). We circumvented this by using relation (104)
to derive the continuum Hamiltonian. However, we would like to emphasize that
one can indeed use the discretized transfer matrix elements (103) or (104) to obtain
directly the Hamiltonians (132) and (136).
Let us use (103) to derive (132). We take the limit given by (116) to obtain
hy|T̂ |xi = G(x, y; g; 1)
(138)


1
(X 2 + Y 2 ) − 2Λ
1 1
1+a2
− a(2X + Y ) + O(a2 ) .
→
aX +Y
X +Y
The first factor is precisely the factor aη from (117). The next factor is the Laplace
transform of the kernel δ(L1 − L2 ) of the unit operator coming from the expansion
T̂ = e−aĤ = 1̂ − aĤ + O(a2 ).

(139)

Finally, one can show that the matrix element of order a in the parentheses is the
Laplace transform of the matrix element hL2 |Ĥ|L1 i with Ĥ given by (132).
One can solve for the eigenvalue equation
Ĥ (1) ψ = Eψ,

(140)

with the constraint that ψ(L) is square-integrable on [0, ∞] with respect to the
measure LdL. One finds [43, 47]
√
√
ψn (L) = Pn (L)e− Λ L , En = 2 Λ(n + 1),
(141)
where Pn (L) is a polynomial of order n, n = 1, 2, . . .. The “ground-state” wave
function of Ĥ (1) is simply
√
√
ψ0 (L) = 2 Λ e− Λ L ,
(142)
and the propagator has the spectral decomposition
(1)
GΛ (L1 , L2 ; T ) =

∞
X

ψn∗ (L2 )ψ(L1 ) e−En T .

(143)

n=0

(1)

We can view GΛ (L1 , L2 ; T ) as the partition function for universes where a spatial
boundary of length L2 is separated by a geodesic distance T from the “initial” spatial
boundary of length L1 . One can then ask for the probability distribution PT ′ (L) of
47

Figure 3: Piecewise linear spacetime in (1+1)-dimensional quantum gravity, generated by computer. Proper time runs along the vertical direction.

the length (the spatial volume) of space at a proper time T ′ between zero and T .
By using (the continuum version of) the decomposition rule (92) we have
R
(1)
(1)
L dL GΛ (L1 , L; T ′ ) Ln GΛ (L, L2 ; T − T ′ )
n
.
(144)
hL iT ′ =
(1)
GΛ (L1 , L2 ; T )
√
Using the spectral decomposition it is easy to show that for T ≫ T ′ ≫ 1/ Λ one
has
1
PT ′ (L) = Lψ02 (L), hLiT ′ = √ ,
(145)
Λ
√

′

√

√

′

up to corrections of order e−2 ΛT , e−2 Λ(T −T ) and e−2 ΛL . This is illustrated in Fig.
3 which shows a two-dimensional spacetime configuration generated by computer
simulations, to be described below. The length of the spatial slices follows the
distribution (145) up to corrections of the kind mentioned above.
Finally note that we have
Ĥ

(1)

(1)
WΛ (L) = 0,

√
e− Λ L
(1)
.
WΛ (L) ≡

L

(146)

(1)

Thus WΛ (L) is formally the function ψ−1 (L) in (141), but is not a normalizable
eigenfunction of Ĥ (1) , since it is not integrable at zero with respect to the measure
L dL. However, it has another interesting interpretation. Let us calculate the amplitude for the process that a spatial universe of length L at a later time T has length
zero. From (123) we obtain
√
√
e−[coth ΛT ] ΛL1
(1)
√
GΛ (L, L2 = 0; T ) = Λ
,
2

sinh

48

ΛT

(147)

and the integral of this amplitude over all time can be viewed as a Hartle-Hawking
amplitude for the universe vanishing into “nothing”. We have
(1)
WΛ (L) =

Z ∞
0

(1)
dT GΛ (L, L2 = 0; T ) =

√

e− Λ L
.
L

(148)

Thus this Hartle-Hawking wave function satisfies
(1)

Ĥ (1) WΛ (L) = 0,

(149)

which can be viewed as a special case of the so-called Wheeler-DeWitt equation.

5

Generalized two-dimensional CDT and “quantum geometry”

We have dealt in some detail with the two-dimensional CDT model because it is
exactly solvable and illustrates some of the points mentioned in the earlier sections:
the entropic nature of the renormalization of bare coupling constants, the use of
the transfer matrix to extract a “quantum gravity Hamiltonian” and the way the
continuum limit is obtained by approaching the critical point. Also, it provided us
with an explicit picture of probability distribution of the spatial slices.
The model can be generalized in a number of ways. One can use different weights
and explore the universality of the model [48] (see also [49]). There also exists a
so-called “string bit” Hamiltonian formulation [50]. One can add a field variable
corresponding to the “lapse” of the ADM formulation to the CDT model [51]. Matter
can be coupled to the model in a straightforward fashion [52, 53, 54]. One can
systematically weaken the causality constraints [55], and it is possible to develop
a complete “string field theory” for this generalized CDT theory [56]. It is also
possible to use matrix models to describe the CDT-models [57]. In addition, one
can relax the constraint that the geometry is bounded by fine-tuning the boundary
cosmological constant [58]. The proper time used in the model has an amazing
interpretation as stochastic time, an observation going all the way back to [59] in
the case of two-dimensional Euclidean quantum gravity. However, the representation
of the model by stochastic quantization is realized in a much simpler manner in the
CDT framework [60]. We refer to the literature for details on most of these topics.

5.1

Suppression of baby universes

In this subsection we will discuss the concept of “quantum geometry”, which is beautiful and simple, and its relation to “baby universes”. Underlying the composition
rules (92) or (95) is the assumption that the spatial geometries form a complete set
of states, as discussed in Sec. 3. Assuming that we only want to include purely geometric quantities like area and length, we are led to essentially two models: the CDT
49

model described above, or two-dimensional Euclidean (Liouville) quantum gravity.
The reason for this is essentially entropic. We are summing over certain classes of
surfaces and want the ensemble to have a well-defined continuum limit, i.e. a scaling
limit where the cutoff a, the lattice length of the elementary links, is taken to zero.
As an example of the constraints imposed by entropy, consider the disc amplitude
W (1) (L), which in the CDT context we met in Sec. 4.2 above. Let us for combina(1)
torial convenience change to the disc amplitude WΛ (L) = LWΛ (L), where a point
has been marked on the boundary. In contrast with what we did above, we will
in the following argument not confine ourselves per se to causal triangulations, but
allow for a larger class of piecewise linear surfaces, namely, all piecewise linear surfaces built out of equilateral triangles and of disc topology. This will create a larger
context within which both strictly Lorentzian and generalized (acausal, Euclidean)
models can be discussed. Let us define the Laplace-transformed disc amplitude as
the partition function
Z
∞

WΛ (X) =

dL e−X L WΛ (L)

(150)

0

of two-dimensional quantum gravity, summed over all two-dimensional spacetimes
with the topology of a disc, whose boundary is characterized by either the length
L or its conjugate boundary cosmological coupling constant X. If we differentiate
this partition function with respect to the cosmological constant Λ, it corresponds
to multiplying the integrand in the path integral by the volume factor V , since the
cosmological term appears in the integrand as e−ΛV . Thus, in a discretized context
such a differentiation is equivalent to marking a vertex or a triangle, since in this
case the counting of different surfaces will increase by a similar factor. The marking
of a vertex gives rise to the decomposition of the disc amplitude shown in Fig. 4,
implying the functional relation
Z ∞
Z ∞
∂WΛ (X)
−
=
dT
dL GΛ (X, L; T ) LWΛ (L).
(151)
∂Λ
0
0
It encodes the following geometric situation: each configuration appearing in the
path integral has a unique decomposition into a cylinder of proper-time extension
T (where the proper time is defined as the geodesic distance of the marked point to
the boundary), and the disc amplitude itself, as summarized in eq. (151).
Starting from a regularized theory with a cutoff a, there are two natural solutions
to eq. (151) [45]. In one of them, the regularized disc amplitude diverges with the
cutoff a and the geodesic distance T scales canonically with the lattice spacing a
according to
Wreg −−→ aη WΛ (X),
a→0

treg −−→ T /aε ,
a→0

50

η < 0,

(152)

ε = 1.

(153)

t

x

Figure 4: Graphical representation of relation (151): differentiating the disc amplitude WΛ (X)
(represented by the entire figure) with respect to the cosmological constant Λ corresponds to
marking a point somewhere inside the disc. This point has a geodesic distance T from the initial
loop. Associated with the point one can identify a connected curve of length L, all of whose points
also have a geodesic distance T to the initial loop. This loop can now be thought of as the curve
along which the lower part of the figure (corresponding to the loop-loop propagator GΛ (X, L; T ))
is glued to the cap, which itself is the disc amplitude WΛ (L).
In the other, the scaling goes as
Wreg −−→ const. + aη WΛ (X),
a→0

treg −−→ T /aε ,
a→0

η = 3/2

(154)

ε = 1/2,

(155)

where the subscript “reg” denotes the regularized quantities in the discrete lattice
formulation. The first scaling (152)-(153), with η = −1, is encountered in CDT,
while the second scaling (154)-(155) is realized in Euclidean gravity [61, 62].
Allowing for the creation of baby universes during the “evolution” in proper time
T (by construction, a process forbidden in CDT) leads to a generalization of (131),
namely,
aε

∂
GΛ,gs (X, Y ; T ) =
∂T
i

∂ h
2
η−1
a(X − Λ) + 2gs a WΛ,gs (X) GΛ,gs (X, Y ; T ) ,
−
∂X

(156)

where we have introduced a new coupling constant gs , associated with the creation of
baby universes, and also made the additional dependence explicit in the amplitudes.
The graphic illustration of eq. (156) is shown in Fig. 5. If gs = 1, i.e. if there is
no suppression of baby universes and each geometry with the same area is allowed
with the same weight, one obtains precisely the equation known from Euclidean
quantum gravity [16]. This happens because according to (152) and (154), we have
either η = −1, which is inconsistent with (156), or we have from (154) that η = 3/2
and thus ε = 1/2, which is consistent with (154). Thus, in the limit a → 0 the
51

=

+

+

Figure 5: In all four graphs, the geodesic distance from the final to the initial loop is given by
T . Differentiating with respect to T leads to eq. (161). Shaded parts of graphs represent the full,
gs -dependent propagator and disc amplitude, and unshaded parts the CDT propagator.

CDT term disappears and on Fig. 5 we are left with the shaded part and eq. (156)
reduces to
i
∂
∂ h
2WΛ,gs=1 (X)GΛ,gs=1 (X, Y ; T ) .
(157)
GΛ,gs =1 (X, Y ; T ) = −
∂T
∂X

On the other hand, setting gs = 0, thereby forbidding the creation of baby universes,
leads of course back to (131).
In the case of CDT, where gs = 0, eq. (156) does not contain any reference to
the disc amplitude and we can solve for GΛ (X, Y ; T ), and subsequently find the
disc amplitude, defined e.g. by (148). In Euclidean quantum gravity gs = 1 and the
term a(X 2 − Λ) vanishes in the limit a → 0. However, now eq. (157) contains the
unknown disc amplitude WΛ (X). The disc amplitude can be found independently
[61], but it can also be found by combining (157) and (151). Note that due to (154)
eq. (151) reads:
Z ∞
∂WΛ (x)
−
∝
dT GΛ (X, L = 0; T ).
(158)
∂Λ
0
If we integrate (157) with respect to T from zero to infinity and with respect to Y
and use (158) on the right-hand side, we obtain


∂
∂
WΛ (X) WΛ (X)
(159)
−1 ∝
∂X
∂Λ
which has the Euclidean gravity solution
q

√
1√ 
Λ
X+ Λ
WΛ (X) = X −
2

(see [45] for details). Thus “quantum geometry” considerations alone entirely determine the disc amplitude and the cylinder amplitude both in CDT and Euclidean
two-dimensional quantum gravity.
From the above discussion it is clear that if we start from the CDT model where
no baby universe creation is allowed, and then drop this geometric constraint, we end
52

up with Euclidean two-dimensional quantum gravity. This was already discussed in
the original article which introduced CDT [45]. However, it is interesting that the
CDT model can also be viewed as an “effective” model of Euclidean gravity. It is
possible to define in a precise way the concept of “integrating out” baby universes,
at the level of the discretized geometries which appear in the path integral defining
Euclidean two-dimensional quantum gravity. By doing so one arrives at the CDT
model [64].
The CDT and Euclidean models were characterized by being purely geometric.
It is possible to find an interpolating model, different from CDT, but with the
same scaling, but still allowing for baby universes during the time evolution like the
Euclidean model. The price is the introduction of a new coupling constant, the gs
already included in eq. (156). By allowing the coupling constant gs to be a function
of the cutoff it is possible to make the “kinetic” CDT term of the same strength as
the baby universe term if we assume
gs = Gs a3 ,

(160)

where Gs is a coupling constant of mass dimension three, which is kept constant
when a → 0. With this choice, eq. (156) is turned into
i

∂ h 2
∂
(X − Λ) + 2Gs WΛ,Gs (X) GΛ,Gs (X, Y ; T ) . (161)
GΛ,Gs (X, Y ; T ) = −
∂T
∂T

The graphical representation of eq. (161) is the one given in Fig. 5. It is clear that
while the creation of baby universes can take place, they are severely suppressed by
the scaling of gs , compared to the Euclidean case where they completely dominate
over the CDT-like, ordinary propagation.
While the disc amplitude is at this stage unknown, it is possible to obtain an
equation for WΛ,Gs (X) by the same methods as used for the purely Euclidean case
just discussed (see [55] for details). The model can also be extended to include higher
topologies [56], and it is possible to find a closed expression for the disc amplitude
summed over all genera [63].

5.2

Coupling to matter

At a formal level it is easy to couple matter to CDT quantum gravity in two dimensions as well as in higher dimensions. In this subsection we describe the results
obtained for two-dimensional CDT, exemplified by the coupling of the Ising model
to CDT-gravity.
The presence of the time slicing makes it natural to put the Ising spins at the
vertices since they are located at the discrete times defined by the lattice. However,
this assignment is not important; one could just as well have placed the spins at the
triangle centres. For simplicity we assume that the time is defined to be periodic.
This implies that our two-dimensional lattice has the topology of a torus where the
53

number of steps in the time direction is fixed to t, while the length of a spatial slice
can fluctuate dynamically. The partition function can be written as
X
e−λN2 (T ) ZT (β),
(162)
G(λ, β, t) =
T ∈Tt

where Tt is the CDT-class of triangulations of toroidal topology as described, λ is
the cosmological constant, N2 (T ) the number of triangles in the triangulation T ,
and ZT (β) denotes the Ising model on the lattice defined by the triangulation T ,
that is,
X
P
(163)
ZT (β) =
eβ hiji∈T δσi σj .
{σi (T )}

In eq. (163) we sum over the spin variables σi located at vertices i, while hiji
denotes the link connecting neighbouring vertices i and j. The parameter β is the
spin coupling constant J divided by the temperature. The Ising spin variable σi can
take values ±1. The generalization for which the spin variable can take the values
1, . . . , q leads to the q-state Potts model. We can write eq. (162) as
X
X
e−λN2 ZN2 (β), ZN2 (β) =
ZT (β),
(164)
G(λ, β, t) =
N2

T ∈Tt (N2 )

where Tt (N2 ) is the CDT-class of triangulations defined as above, but constrained
to have N2 triangles.
In general one expects a leading behaviour of the form


γ(β)−3
ZN2 (β) ∼ eµ(β)N2 N2
1 + O(1/N2 ) ,
(165)

which means that we can view µ(β) as the free energy density at β for the ensemble
of random lattices when the size N2 goes to infinity. If the spin system defined on
this ensemble has a phase transition from a low-temperature magnetized phase to
a high-temperature phase with magnetization zero at a certain value βc , this fact
will show up as a discontinuity in the derivative of µ(β) at βc at a certain order,
depending on the order of the phase transition. It is also possible that the exponent
γ(β) can be discontinuous at βc .
The same construction works for the DT-class of triangulations. In this case it
is possible to solve the discretized models analytically using a mapping to matrix
models [65]. The solution reveals that at a certain critical (inverse) temperature βc
there is a third-order phase transition from a magnetized phase (high β) to a phase
at low β where the magnetization is zero. The critical exponents associated with this
transition differ from the flat-space Onsager exponents and agree with the so-called
KPZ exponents [66], which can be calculated because two-dimensional Euclidean
quantum gravity coupled to conformal field theories with central charge c < 1 can
be solved analytically by conformal bootstrap [66]. For β 6= βc , when the spin
system is not critical, the geometric properties of the coupled geometry-spin system
54

are identical to that of two-dimensional Euclidean quantum gravity without matter.
However, at βc the geometric properties of the coupled system change from that of
“pure” Euclidean gravity to something else, for example, the entropy exponent γ(β)
changes from −1/2 to −1/3 at βc . This value, first calculated in [65], is in agreement
with the continuum calculation [66].
The results for CDT quantum gravity coupled to the Ising model are different
from the KPZ results. At this stage it has not been possible to solve the combined model analytically in the same way as in Euclidean two-dimensional gravity
coupled to matter. One can resort to strong-coupling expansions and Monte Carlo
simulations, with both methods showing that there is a phase transition between a
magnetized and an unmagnetized phase [52]. The critical matter exponents found
are the (flat-space) Onsager exponents. In addition, the entropy exponent γ(β) in
eq. (165) is equal to 1/2 for all values of β, including βc , with evidence of similar
results for the three-state Potts model [53]. In two dimensions, the coupling between
geometry and matter therefore appears to be weaker for CDT than for Euclidean
gravity. This should not come as a surprise since we have already seen that one
can view CDT in two dimensions as an “effective” version of 2d Euclidean quantum
gravity, where baby universes have been integrated out. At the same time there
exist persuasive arguments explaining the difference between the flat-space Onsager
and the KPZ exponents by the presence of baby universes [67]. Following this logic
it is then not surprising that two-dimensional CDT gravity coupled to conformal
matter gives rise to flat-spacetime exponents. It would be very interesting if the
result could be derived from the Euclidean model by integrating out baby universes,
in the same way as pure CDT can be obtained from the pure Euclidean model.
Until now the fact that one has to integrate over the matter configurations at the
boundaries of the baby universes has prevented us from imitating the pure-gravity
construction.

6

Changing geometries: Monte Carlo moves

6.1

The need for Monte Carlo simulations

We have used the two-dimensional model as an illustration of how one can obtain a
continuum limit of “quantum geometry”, starting from a discretized lattice theory.
This is a nontrivial proof of principle, but our main interest is of course the fully
fledged four-dimensional theory of quantum gravity. We expect this theory to behave
differently, reflecting the presence of true propagating degrees of freedom (suitable
nonperturbative analogues of the “gravitons” of the linearized theory) and the fact
that it is a nonrenormalizable field theory.
From this point of view, three-dimensional quantum gravity has a place in between two- and four-dimensional quantum gravity. It has a nontrivial EinsteinHilbert action, and associated with it a formally nonrenormalizable gravitational
coupling constant. However, since three-dimensional gravity has no propagating
55

degrees of freedom, it most likely will tell us nothing about the problem of nonrenormalizability. The fact that physical results depend only on a finite number
of degrees of freedom (and therefore no field degrees of freedom) suggests that the
(quantum) theory could be exactly solvable, like the two-dimensional quantum theory. There have been a number of attempts to solve the three-dimensional CDT
theory analytically, so far with only limited success, due to the difficulty of generalizing the exact solution methods to three dimensions [68, 69, 70]. Thus, even in
three dimensions, to make progress beyond these results, we must turn to numerical methods [71, 72], a situation also shared by general, non-gravitational lattice
models.
Also in four dimensions we have presently no analytic tools for tackling the
CDT path integral directly. The results reported below for four-dimensional CDT
quantum gravity are based on Monte Carlo simulations, using the action (73). In the
remainder of this section we will discuss how to conduct Monte Carlo simulations
for causal dynamical triangulations, which are important even in lower dimensions.
Neither the two-dimensional model with matter coupling nor the three-dimensional
model (with and without matter) have so far been solved analytically.

6.2

Monte Carlo simulation with dynamical lattices

Conventional Monte Carlo simulations in quantum field theory use a fixed lattice of
(Euclidean) spacetime, and have fields defined on this fixed lattice. The theory is
defined by a partition function
X
e−S[φ] ,
(166)
Z=
φ

where we sum over all field configurations on the lattice. Let O(φ) be an observable
depending on the fields. Using the path integral we can in principle calculate the
expectation value
X
O(φ) e−S[φ] .
(167)
hO(φ)i = Z −1
φ

The purpose of the Monte Carlo simulations is to generate a sequence of statistically
independent field configurations φ(n), n = 1, . . . , N with the probability distribution
P (φ(n)) = Z −1 e−S[φ(n)] .
Then

(168)

N

1 X
hO(φ)iN =
O(φ(n))
N n=1

(169)

serves as an estimator of the expectation value (167) and one has
hO(φ)iN → hO(φ)i for N → ∞.
56

(170)

One starts out with a field configuration φ(0) or, more generally, with a probability distribution P0 (φ). One then performs certain changes, starting from φ0 or,
more generally, from a sequence of configurations φ chosen with probability P0 (φ).
These changes are accepted or rejected according to certain criteria which ensure
that field configurations after sufficiently many changes will occur with the correct
weight (168), dictated by the path integral. In a Monte Carlo simulation a change
φ → φ′ of the field configuration is usually generated by a stochastic process T , a
Markov chain. The field will perform a random walk in the space of field configurations with a transition function, or transition probability, T (φ → φ′ ). Thus, if after
a certain number n of steps (changes of the field configuration) we have arrived at
a field configuration φ(n), T (φ(n) → φ(n + 1)) is the probability of changing φ(n)
to φ(n + 1) in the next step. We have
X
T (φ → φ′ ) = 1 for all φ.
(171)
φ′

The transition probability should be chosen such that
(i) any field configuration φ can be reached in a finite number of steps (ergodicity);
(ii) the probability distribution of field configurations converges, as the number of
steps goes to infinity, to the Boltzmann distribution (168).
The convergence of the Markov chain is usually ensured by choosing T to satisfy
the so-called rule of detailed balance
P (φ) T (φ → φ′ ) = P (φ′ )T (φ′ → φ).

(172)

Starting out with an initial configuration φ(0) or, more generally, an initial probability distribution of configurations P0 (φ), the stochastic process will after n steps
have generated a new probability distribution Pn (φ). The relation between Pn (φ)
and Pn+1 (φ) is
X
Pn (φ′ ) T (φ′ → φ).
(173)
Pn+1 (φ) =
φ′

Using the identity (171), the right-hand side of this equation can be written as

X
Pn (φ) +
Pn (φ′ ) T (φ′ → φ) − Pn (φ) T (φ → φ′ ) .
(174)
φ′

According to relations (173) and (174), the rule (172) of detailed balance ensures
that the distribution P (φ) is a stationary distribution under the stochastic process
T . We refer to standard textbooks for a proof that Pn converges to P . Basically, the
detailed-balance condition tells us that P (φ) is the unique eigenvector of T (φ → φ′ )
with eigenvalue one, whereas all other eigenvectors have smaller eigenvalues.
57

A solution to (172) is that either T (φ → φ′ ) = T (φ′ → φ) = 0 or
P (φ′ )
T (φ → φ′ )
=
.
T (φ′ → φ)
P (φ)

(175)

Usually one chooses T (φ → φ′ ) to be nonzero only if some notion of distance between
φ and φ′ is small, since else most attempted changes will be rejected. On the
other hand, the class of nonvanishing transition amplitudes among the configurations
φ must satisfy the condition of ergodicity, so it cannot be too restricted. The
choice of nonvanishing transition amplitudes has a crucial influence on the efficiency
of the algorithm. Using (175), one usually decomposes the transition probability
T (φ → φ′ ) into a selection probability g(φ → φ′ ) and an acceptance ratio A(φ → φ′ ).
According to eq. (175) we then have
P (φ′)
T (φ → φ′ )
g(φ → φ′ )A(φ → φ′ )
=
=
.
P (φ)
T (φ′ → φ)
g(φ′ → φ)A(φ′ → φ)

(176)

The selection probability g(φ → φ′ ) is now designed to select the configurations
φ, φ′, where T (φ → φ′ ) is different from zero and assigns a weight of our choice to
the transition φ → φ′ . The acceptance ratio A(φ → φ′ ) should then be chosen to
ensure detailed balance in the form (176). A general choice, used in many Monte
Carlo simulations, is the so-called Metropolis algorithm, defined by
 g(φ′ → φ) P (φ′) 
′
A(φ → φ ) = min 1,
,
(177)
g(φ → φ′ ) P (φ)
 g(φ → φ′ ) P (φ) 
′
.
(178)
A(φ → φ) = min 1,
g(φ′ → φ) P (φ′)
In standard lattice field theory the lattice is fixed and not part of the dynamics. For quantum gravity models based on dynamical triangulations the situation
is different. The lattice is represented by an abstract triangulation, which itself
represents a curved spacetime geometry. In the path integral we sum over all triangulations, each associated with an action and thus a weight. It is the lattice itself
which changes in this type of quantum gravity model. The Monte Carlo simulation
must be set up to move us around in the class of abstract CDT triangulations with
the correct weight.
In Euclidean quantum gravity models, where one performs the summation over
all abstract triangulations of a fixed topology, the so-called Pachner moves [73] are
a minimal set of local topology-preserving changes of the triangulations which are
ergodic. This means that by repeated use of these “moves” it is possible to get
from one triangulation of a certain topology to any other of the same topology. In
the computer we work with labeled triangulations. Thus the partition function will
be represented in the numerical simulations as a sum over labeled triangulations, as
described in the discussion surrounding eq. (75) in Sec. 3. Speaking in general terms,
the computer then keeps a list of the vertices of the triangulation, for each vertex a
58

list of all the neighbouring vertices and a list of how this set of points is organized
into simplices and subsimplices. There are many different ways to organize and store
this information. It is not our intention to go into a detailed discussion of this, but
in the next subsection we will give an example of how this can be done in the very
simple case of two-dimensional CDT, and how the tables are updated when a move
is performed.
The Pachner moves used in Euclidean dynamical triangulations are not directly
applicable in CDT since they generally do not respect the sliced structure of the
Lorentzian discrete geometries. Our strategy for constructing suitable sets of moves
is to first select moves that are ergodic within the spatial slices t = const. (this is
clearly a necessary condition for ergodicity in the complete set of four-dimensional
triangulations of fixed topology), and then supplement them by moves that act
within the sandwiches ∆t = 1. In manipulating triangulations, especially in four
dimensions, it is useful to know the numbers of simplicial building blocks of type A
contained in a given building block of type B of equal or larger dimension (Table 1).
If the moves are used as part of a Monte Carlo updating algorithm, they will
be rejected whenever the resulting triangulation would violate the simplicial manifold constraints. The latter are restrictions on the possible gluings (the pairwise
identifications of subsimplices of dimension d − 1) to make sure that the boundary
of the neighbourhood of each vertex has the topology of a S d−1 -sphere [40]. In dimension three, “forbidden” configurations are conveniently characterized in terms
of the intersection pattern of the triangulation at some half-integer time. The latter is given by a two-dimensional tessellation in terms of squares and triangles or,
alternatively, its dual three- and four-valent graph (see Appendix 2 in [71] for details). Also in four dimensions, one may characterize sandwich geometries by the
three-dimensional geometry obtained when cutting the four-dimensional geometry
at a half-integer time between two adjacent spatial triangulations height. The corresponding three-dimensional geometry consists of two types of three-dimensional
building blocks, tetrahedra and prisms (see also [74]).
To summarize: the moves define the possible changes we can make to go from one
triangulation to another. Thus they serve precisely as part of the section function
g(T → T ′ ) mentioned above. In this way the moves allow us to define the selection
function g(T → T ′ ) mentioned above. As a next step, we choose the acceptance
ratio A(T → T ′ ) such that detailed balance is satisfied for a particular move and its
“inverse”. In the next subsections we will describe the CDT moves in two, three and
four dimensions explicitly. In addition, we will discuss how the functions g(T → T ′ )
and A(T → T ′ ) are determined in two dimensions.

6.3

Moves in two dimensions

The two-dimensional case is simple. Two moves which are ergodic and respect the
CDT structure of spacetime are shown in Fig. 6. We denote the two moves by (2,2)
and (2,4). The (2,2)-move takes two adjacent triangles positioned as shown in Fig.
59

contains

N0

N1TL

N1SL

N2TL

N2SL

N3

N3

(2,2)

N3SL

N4

N4

N0

1

2

2

3

3

4

4

4

5

5

1

0

2

0

3

4

0

4

6

1

1

3

3

2

6

6

4

1

0

3

4

0

6

9

1

1

0

4

4

1

1

0

0

4

2

1

0

0

3

1

1

0

1

0

N1TL
N1SL
N2TL
N2SL
(3,1)
N3
(2,2)
N3
N3SL
(4,1)
N4
(3,2)
N4

(3,1)

(4,1)

(3,2)

1

Table 1: Numbers of simplicial building blocks contained in simplices of equal or higher dimension.
6, that is, a (1,2)- and a (2,1)-triangle sharing a timelike link, and flips the diagonal,
thus not changing the boundary of the subcomplex consisting of the two triangles.
Similarly, the (2,4)-move takes two adjacent triangles sharing a spacelike link and
replaces the two triangles by four triangles, as shown in Fig. 6. Again, the boundary
of this new subcomplex is identical to the boundary of the original subcomplex
consisting of the two adjacent triangles. The inverse move, a (4,2)-move, takes a
vertex of order four and deletes it, together with the two timelike links and one of
the spacelike links sharing the vertex. As a result, two triangles are deleted and one
is left with a subcomplex of two adjacent triangles sharing a spacelike link. If we
use the labeling of vertices shown in Fig. 6, the changes are encoded by writing for
the (2,2)-move
123 + 234 ↔ 134 + 124,
(179)
and similarly for the (2,4)-move
134 + 234 ↔ 135 + 145 + 235 + 245.

(180)

The labeling abc denotes a triangle consisting of vertices with labels a, b and c,
regardless of their orientation. Similarly, ab denotes a link. Thus 123+234 stands
for a subcomplex whose triangles share link 23, while the boundary is made of the
links which are not shared, i.e. 12, 13, 24 and 34. This “algebraic” representation
is very convenient and can be generalized in a straightforward manner to higher
dimensions. It is the one used in the computer. For example, in four dimensions
two four-simplices 12345 and 23456 will share the tetrahedron 2345.
Let us use the two-dimensional case to discuss the detailed-balance aspect of the
Monte Carlo updating, since it is slightly more complicated than in ordinary lattice
60

3

4

3

4

1

2

1

2

2

3

2

3

4

1

5

4

1

Figure 6: The moves used in the Monte Carlo updating of the two-dimensional CDT geometry.
The top figure shows the (2,2)-move, and the bottom figure the (2,4)-move.

Monte Carlo simulations. Given is the space of configurations, in this case, the
abstract two-dimensional triangulations with the topology of a cylinder, satisfying
the CDT requirements. To simplify the discussion of boundaries let us compactify
the time direction, thereby creating a torus. In the computer we work with labeled
triangulations, with the action given by (90). For a given triangulation T , since
the number of triangles N2 (T ) is two times the number of vertices N0 (T ), we have
S(T ) = 2λN0 (T ). Since we work with labeled triangulations in the computer,
according to (75) the probability assigned to a given triangulation is given by
P (T ) =

1
1
e−2λN0 (T ) .
Z N0 (T )!

(181)

Let us consider the (2,4)-move and its inverse. In order to have an ergodic set
of moves we will also need to invoke the (2,2)-move, which we will simply do by
alternating with a suitable frequency between (2,4)- and (2,2)-moves. We require
detailed balance for the (2,4)-move and its inverse. According to (176) we write
T (T → T ′ )
g(T → T ′ )A(T → T ′ )
P (T ′ )
=
=
.
P (T )
T (T ′ → T )
g(T ′ → T )A(T ′ → T )

(182)

Given a labeled triangulation TN0 and performing move (2,4), we create a new
labeled triangulation with N0 + 1 vertices. If the old vertices are labeled 1 to N0 , we
assign the label N0 + 1 to the new vertex. (New links and triangles are defined by
pairs and triples of vertex labels, the triples also defining the correct orientation.)
Starting from a labeled triangulation TN0 we can construct N0 labeled triangulations
TN0 +1 by choosing different vertices and performing the (2,4)-move. We define the
selection probability g(TN0 → TN0 +1 ) to be the same for all triangulations TN0 +1
that can be reached in this way and zero for all other labeled TN0 +1 triangulations.
61

For the labeled triangulations which can be reached in this way we have
g(TN0 → TN0 +1 ) =

1
.
N0

(183)

We implement this in the computer program by choosing randomly with uniform
probability a vertex in TN0 .
Given a labeled triangulation TN0 +1 we perform the (4,2)-move as follows. Select
the vertex labeled N0 + 1, and assume for the moment it is of order four. Delete it
from the list, in this way creating a labeled triangulation TN0 . If the vertex labeled
N0 + 1 is not of order four do not perform the move.11 Thus, for the triangulations
TN0 +1 where the move can be performed we can only reach one triangulation TN0
and the selection probability g(TN0 +1 → TN0 ) defined by this procedure is one.
Finally, choose the acceptance ratios A(T → T ′ ) in accordance with the Metropolis
algorithm, (177)-(178) as


N0
−2λ
A(TN0 → TN0 +1 ) = min 1,
,
(184)
e
N0 + 1
 N +1

0
A(TN0 +1 → TN0 ) = min 1,
(185)
e2λ .
N0
The line of argument given here for the (2,4)-move applies to all moves discussed
below, namely, one first chooses a suitable selection probability g(T → T ′ ) and then
adjusts the acceptance ratio accordingly, such that the detailed-balance equation is
satisfied.

6.4

Moves in three dimensions

For the three-dimensional CDT triangulations there are five basic moves (counting
inverse moves as separate) [71, 76]. They map one three-dimensional CDT triangulation into another, while preserving the constant-time slice structure, as well as
the total proper time t. We label the moves by how they affect the number of simplices of top-dimension, i.e. d = 3. A (m, n)-move is one that operates on a local
subcomplex of m tetrahedra and replaces it by a different one with n tetrahedra.
In all cases the two-dimensional boundaries of the two subcomplexes are identical12 .
The tetrahedra themselves are characterized by 4-tuples of vertex labels. Throughout, we will not distinguish moves that are mirror images of each other under time
reflection. In detail, the moves are
11
One is free to avoid this situation by keeping a list of vertices of order four and choosing
at random one of these vertices, rather than the one with label N0 + 1. This can be viewed as
redefining the labeling, interchanging the label of the chosen vertex with the vertex labeled N0 + 1,
and reassigning the labeling of links and triangles correspondingly. Of course, we do not really
have to make the reassignment in the computer since all labelings are equivalent.
12
The notation of a (m, n)-move can be generalized to any dimension d. We have already used
it in the case d = 2 for the (2,2)-move and the (2,4)-move. We have two subcomplexes consisting
of m and n d-simplices, but with identical (d − 1)-dimensional boundaries.

62

2

2

4

4
5

5

6

3

3

1

1

Figure 7: The (2,6)-move in three dimensions.
(2,6): this move operates on a pair of a (1,3)- and a (3,1)-tetrahedron (with vertex
labels 1345 and 2345) sharing a spatial triangle (with vertex labels 345). A
vertex (with label 6) is then inserted at the centre of the triangle and connected
by new edges to the vertices 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. The final configuration consists
of six tetrahedra, three below and three above the spatial slice containing the
triangles (Fig. 7). This operation may be encoded by writing
1345 + 2345 → 1346 + 2346 + 1356 + 2356 + 1456 + 2456,

(186)

where the shared triangles on the right-hand side of the arrow have labels 346,
356 and 456. The inverse move (6,2) corresponds to a reversal of the arrow
in (186). Obviously, it can only be performed if the triangulation contains a
suitable subcomplex of six tetrahedra.
(4,4): This move can be performed on a subcomplex of two (1,3)- and two (3,1)tetrahedra forming a “diamond” (see Fig. 8), with one neighbouring pair each
above and below a spatial slice. The move is then
1235 + 2356 + 1345 + 3456 → 1234 + 2346 + 1245 + 2456.

(187)

From the point of view of the spatial “square” (double triangle) 2345, the move
(187) corresponds to a flip of its diagonal. It is accompanied by a corresponding
reassignment of the tetrahedra constituting the diamond. The (2,6)- and (6,2)moves, together with the (4,4)-move (which is its own inverse) induce moves
within the spatial slices that are known to be ergodic for two-dimensional
triangulations.
(2,3): The last move, together with its inverse, affects the sandwich geometry without
changing the spatial slices at integer-t. It is performed on a pair of a (3,1)and a (2,2)-tetrahedron which share a triangle 345 in common (see Fig. 9),

63

6

6

5

5
4

4

2

2
3

3

1

1

Figure 8: The (4,4)-move in three dimensions.
4

4

2

1

2

1

5
3

5
3

Figure 9: The (2,3)-move in three dimensions.
and consists in substituting this triangle by the one-dimensional edge 12 dual
to it,
1345 + 2345 → 1234 + 1235 + 1245.
(188)
The resulting configuration consists of one (3,1)- and two (2,2)-tetrahedra,
sharing the link 12. Again, there is an obvious inverse.

6.5

Moves in four dimensions

If we distinguish between the space- and timelike character of all of the fourdimensional moves, there is a total of ten moves (including inverses). We will again
characterize simplices in terms of their vertex labels. The first two types of moves,
(2,8) and (4,6), reproduce a set of ergodic moves in three dimensions when restricted
to spatial slices. We will describe each of the moves in turn [76].
(2,8): The initial configuration for this move is a pair of a (1,4)- and a (4,1)-simplex,
sharing a purely spacelike tetrahedron 3456 (Fig. 10). The move consists in inserting an additional vertex 7 at the center of this tetrahedron and subdividing
the entire subcomplex so as to obtain eight four-simplices,
13456 + 23456 →
(189)
13457 + 23457 + 13467 + 23467 + 13567 + 23567 + 14567 + 24567,
64

2

2

5

6

6

5

7

4

4

3

3

1

1

Figure 10: The (2,8)-move in four dimensions.

2

7

7

4

4

3

2

6

3

6
5

5

1

1

Figure 11: The (4,6)-move in four dimensions.
with an obvious inverse.
(4,6): In this configuration, we start from a pair (2345,3456) of spatial tetrahedra
sharing a common triangle 345, which are connected to a vertex 1 at time
t−1 and another vertex 7 at time t+1, forming together a subcomplex of size
four (Fig. 11). The move consists in swapping the triangle 345 with its (spatially) dual edge 26, during which the two spatial tetrahedra are substituted
by three, and the geometry above and below the spatial slice at time t changes
accordingly. In our by now familiar notation, this amounts to
12345 + 23457 + 13456 + 34567 →
12346 + 23467 + 12356 + 23567 + 12456 + 24567,

(190)

with the arrow reversed for the corresponding inverse move.
(2,4): This type of move comes in two varieties. Its general structure is as follows:
65

6

6
1

1

5

5

2

2
3

3

4

4

Figure 12: The (2,4)-move in four dimensions, first version.
5

5
6

6

2

4

1

2

4

1
3

3

Figure 13: The (2,4)-move in four dimensions, second version.
the initial configuration is a pair of four-simplices with a common tetrahedron.
During the move, this tetrahedron is “deleted” and substituted by its dual (in
a four-dimensional sense) edge. The end result is a subcomplex consisting of
four 4-simplices. From a Lorentzian point of view, there are two situations
where the application of this move does not interfere with the slice-structure
or the manifold constraints. In the first one, a (4,1)- and a (3,2)-tetrahedron
from the same sandwich share a (3,1)-tetrahedron 3456 (Fig. 12). The dual
edge 12 is timelike and shared in the final configuration by one (4,1)- and three
(3,2)-simplices. The second possibility is that of two (3,2)-simplices sharing a
(2,2)-tetrahedron. One of the (3,2)-simplices is “upside-down”, such that the
entire subcomplex has spatial triangles in both the slices at t and at t+1 (134
and 256, see Fig. 13). After the move, the total number of (3,2)-simplices has
again increased by two. Both types of moves are described by the relation
13456 + 23456 → 12345 + 12346 + 12456 + 12356,

(191)

and their inverses by the converse relation.
(3,3): The initial subcomplex in this type of move is made up of three 4-simplices
which share a triangle in common. In the course of the move, this triangle is
“deleted” and substituted by its dual (in a four-dimensional sense), which is
again a triangle. It is straightforward to verify that this move can only occur in
66

3

6

4
111
000
111
000
111
000
111
000
111
000
111
000
111
000
111
000
111
000

1

3

6

2

1

5

4
111
000
111
000
111
000
111
000
111
000
111
000
111
000
111
000
111
000

2

5

Figure 14: The (3,3)-move in four dimensions, first version.
6
2

6
2

3

4
5

3

4
1

5

1

Figure 15: The (3,3)-move in four dimensions, second version.
Lorentzian gravity if both of the triangles involved are timelike. Again, there
are two allowed variations of the move. In the first one, both the initial and
final subcomplex consist of one (4,1)- and two (3,2)-simplices, and the spacelike
edge of each of the triangles 123 and 456 lies in the same slice t = const. (Fig.
14). The four-simplices are rearranged according to
12456 + 13456 + 23456 → 12345 + 12346 + 12356.

(192)

The other initial configuration for which (192) can be performed involves only
(3,2)-simplices of both orientations, as illustrated in Fig. 15. The “swapped”
triangle 123 now has its spacelike edge in the opposite spatial slice from that
of the original triangle 456. As in the (4,4)-move in three dimensions, this
type of move is its own inverse.

7

The entropic nature of CDT and the phase diagram

We are now ready to set up Monte Carlo simulations of the four-dimensional CDT
quantum gravity model. We store the simplicial geometry as a set of lists, which
67

consist of sequences of labels for simplices of dimension n, 0 ≤ n ≤ 4, together
with their position and orientation with respect to the time direction. Additional
list data include information about nearest neighbours, i.e. how the triangulation
“hangs together”, and other discrete data (for example, how many four-simplices
meet at a given edge) which help improve the acceptance rate of Monte Carlo moves.
The simulation is set up to generate a random walk in the ensemble of causal
geometries of a fixed time extension t. We are of course interested in conducting
the simulations with triangulations that are as large as possible. However, since
the moves used to change the triangulation are local, the time it takes to change
a given triangulation into a new “independent” triangulation will increase with the
size of the triangulation. Thus one has to find a compromise between (computer)
time and size. Until now we have used triangulations which consists of up to 362.000
four-simplices. To get an idea of the corresponding linear size, suppose we organized
the four-simplices such that they approximately formed a regular four-dimensional
lattice. The size of this lattice turns out to be up to 9.54 . While we are working
with our dynamically generated universe in the computer, hoping to find measurable
observables, it is worth keeping in mind that we are trying to squeeze the universe
into a 104 lattice! Not unlike in lattice QCD, this obviously limits the kind of
questions we can ask. Clearly, if we added matter, it would be difficult to study the
formation of galaxies, even if we could manage to find a way to address this question
after rotating to Euclidean signature.

7.1

The entropic nature of CDT and the continuum limit

The action we are using is (73) is a compact rewriting of the Einstein-Hilbert action
(72). There are three coupling constants, κ0 , κ4 and ∆, where κ4 is related to the
cosmological coupling constant as described in Sec. 2.9.3 and dictates the average
number of N4 . The cosmological-constant term contributes at the same leading
order as the entropy (the number of triangulations with a given number N4 of foursimplices), which also grows exponentially with N4 [41]. We encountered a similar
phenomenon in the two-dimensional model which could be solved analytically (see
(125)).13 As discussed in connection with (125), the exponential growth defines a
critical point, to which one has to fine-tune the bare cosmological constant. If the
bare cosmological constant is smaller than the critical value, the partition function
is simply ill defined. If it is larger than the critical value the expectation value hN4 i
will remain finite even as N4 → ∞. We test arbitrarily large values of N4 when finetuning the bare cosmological constant to its critical value, precisely as in the twodimensional case. In addition, the renormalized, physical cosmological constant is
defined by this approach to the critical value, again like in two dimensions. However,
13

Contrary to the situation in two dimensions there is no analytic proof of the exponential
bound in three- or four-dimensional DT. At some stage, there were claims (based on Monte Carlo
simulations) that the number grows much faster [75]. However, it is now generally believed that
the growth is only exponential as a function of N4 .

68

the subleading correction to the exponential growth of the number of triangulations,
i.e. the function f (n) in (125) in the two-dimensional case, can be different.
Let us make the discussion more explicit to illustrate the analogy with the twodimensional case and to emphasize the role of “entropy”, i.e. the number of configurations. We can write the partition function as
X
X
(4,1)
1
.
(193)
e−(κ4 +∆)N4 e−∆N4 e(κ0 +6∆)N0
Z(κ0 , κ4 , ∆) =
CT
(4,1)
(4,1)
N4 ,N4

,N0

T (N4 ,N4

,N0 )

Introducing
x = e−(κ4 +∆) ,

y = e−∆ ,

z = e(κ0 +6∆) ,

(194)

this can be rewritten as
Z̃(x, y, z) =

X

(4,1)

xN4 y N4

(4,1)
N4 ,N4
,N0

(4,1)

z N0 N (N4 , N4

, N0 ),

(195)

(4,1)

where N (N4 , N4 , N0 ) denotes the number of CDT configurations with N4 four(4,1)
simplices, N4
of which are of type (4, 1) or (1, 4), and with N0 vertices, including
symmetry factors. We conclude that the calculation of the partition function is
in principle a combinatorial problem, just as in two dimensions where we could
solve the problem explicitly. Our rationale for calling the model entropic is that the
partition function is entirely determined by the number of geometries in the simplest
possible way, in the sense of being the generating function for these numbers. The
logarithm of the number of geometric “microscopic” configurations for given numbers
(4,1)
(N4 , N4 , N0 ) is proportional to their entropy in the sense of statistical models.14
Unlike in two dimensions, it has until now not been possible to solve this counting
problem analytically. As mentioned above, one cannot even prove the exponential
bound. This means that we will in the first place probe the properties of (193) with
numerical methods.
Let us now turn to the renormalization of the cosmological constant by finetuning κ4 . We write the partition function as
X
e−(κ4 +∆)N4 ZN4 (κ0 , ∆),
Z(κ0 , κ4 , ∆) =
(196)
N4

where ZN4 (κ0 , ∆) is the partition function for a fixed number N4 of four-simplices,
namely,
X 1
(4,1)
ZN4 (κ0 , ∆) =
e−∆N4 (TN4 ) e(κ0 +6∆)N0 (TN4 ) .
(197)
C
T
T
N4

14

For a statistical system, like a spin system, the entropy is defined as (proportional to) the
logarithm of the number of states which appear in the definition of the partition function as a
state sum. When talking about “entropy”, it is by analogy with such statistical systems. However,
while a “state” in the classical partition function for spins can be considered as physical, a “history”
contributing to the path integral in quantum field theory (or in quantum mechanics) is not physical.
After rotation to Euclidean time, the path integral can be viewed as partition function of a (virtual)
statistical system. It is only in this sense that we talk about the entropy of geometries.

69

As already mentioned, there is numerical evidence that ZN4 (κ0 , ∆) is exponentially
bounded as a function of N4 [41],
c

ZN4 (κ0 , ∆) ≤ e(κ4 +∆)N4 f (N4 , κ0 , ∆),

(198)

where f (N4 ) grows slower than exponentially. We call κc4 the critical value of κ4 .
It is a function of ∆ and κ0 and plays the same role as λc in the two-dimensional
model discussed above: the partition function is only defined for κ4 > κc4 and the
“infinite-volume” limit, where hN4 i → ∞ can only be achieved for κ4 → κc4 . We
are interested in sending the lattice spacings a = as , at to zero while keeping the
physical four-volume, which is roughly N4 a4 , fixed. Thus we want to consider the
limit N4 → ∞, and fine-tune κ4 to κc4 for fixed κ0 , ∆. This fine-tuning is similar
to the fine-tuning λ → λc in the two-dimensional model. Like there, we expect the
physical cosmological constant Λ to be defined by the approach to the critical point
according to
Λ 4
κ4 = κc4 +
a,
(199)
16πG
which is the counterpart to (127). It ensures that the term
(κ4 − κc4 ) N4 =

Λ
V4 ,
16πG

V4 = N4 a4 ,

(200)

gives rise to the standard cosmological term in the Einstein-Hilbert action. Thus
the fine-tuning of κ4 → κc4 brings us to the limit of infinite four-volume. It does not
necessarily imply a continuum limit too. The situation here may be different from
that of the two-dimensional model, where approaching λc automatically implied a
continuum limit. Two-dimensional quantum gravity is of course a very simple model
with no propagating degrees of freedom, which we do expect to be present in fourdimensional quantum gravity. Thus the situation is more like in ordinary Euclidean
lattice field theory/critical phenomena, where “infinite volume” does not necessarily
mean “continuum limit”.
A good example of what one might expect is the Ising model on a finite lattice.
To obtain a phase transition for this model one has to take the lattice volume to
infinity, since there are no genuine phase transitions for finite systems. However,
just taking the lattice volume to infinity is not sufficient to ensure critical behaviour
of the Ising model. We also have to tune the coupling constant to its critical value,
at which point the spin-spin correlation length diverges. Similarly, in CDT, having
adjusted κ4 (κ0 , ∆) we have to search the coupling constant space of ∆ and κ0 in
order to find regions where we do not only have an infinite four-volume limit but
also an interesting limit from the point of view of continuum physics.
How can one imagine obtaining an interesting continuum behaviour as a function
of κ0 ? For purposes of illustration we ignore ∆ and assume that the subleading
correction f (N4 , k0 ) has the form
√

f (N4 , κ0 ) = ek(κ0 ) N4 .
70

(201)

(We will later on check numerically that such a term is indeed present.) The partition
function now becomes
X
√
c
e−(κ4 −κ4 )N4 +k(κ0 ) N4 .
Z(κ4 , κ0 ) =
(202)
N4

For dimensional reasons we expect the classical Einstein term in the action to scale
like
√
Z
p
V4
1
4
d ξ g(ξ) R(ξ) ∝
,
(203)
16πG
G
motivating the search for a value κc0 with k(κc0 ) = 0, with the approach to this point
governed by
√
p
V4
a2
k(κ0 ) N4 ∝
.
(204)
k(κ0 ) ∝ , i.e.
G
G
With such a choice we can identify a continuum limit where hN4 i, calculated from
(202) (by a trivial saddle point calculation), goes to infinity while a → 0,
hN4 i =
Thus we find
hV4 i ∝

√

c

−(κ4 −κ4 )N4 +k(κ0 ) N4
1
k 2 (κ0 )
N N4 e
∝ 2 4.
P4 −(κ −κc )N +k(κ )√N ≈
c
2
4
4
0
4
4(κ4 − κ4 )
Λa
4
N4 e

P

1
,
Λ2

Z(κ4 , κ0 ) ≈ exp

 c 
 k 2 (κ ) 
0
=
exp
,
4(κ4 − κc4 )
GΛ

(205)

(206)

as one would naı̈vely expect from Einstein’s equations, with the partition function
being dominated by a typical instanton contribution, for a suitable constant c > 0.

7.2

Set-up of computer simulations

The actual set-up for the computer simulations is slightly different from the theoretical framework discussed above, in that we choose to work with a fixed number
of four-simplices N4 , rather than fine-tuning κ4 to its critical value. We can perform
computer simulations for various N4 (and fixed κ0 , ∆) and in this way check scaling
with respect to N4 . This is an alternative to fine-tuning κ4 , and much more convenient from a computational point of view. For large N4 we can then check whether
there are any finite-size effects or whether effectively we have already reached the
infinite-volume limit. At a formal level we can perform a Laplace transformation of
the partition function,
Z
∞

Z(Λ) =

dV e−Λ V Z(V ),

(207)

0

where

Z(V ) =

Z

−SEin [gµν ]

D[gµν ] e

71

δ

Z

√

g−V



,

(208)

(4,1)

“four-volume” Ñ4 = N4

(4,1)

actual four-volume N4 = N4

10
(3,2)

+N4

20

40

80

160

22.25 45.5 91 181 362

Table 2: Translation table between the two types of discrete four-volume, Ñ4 and N4 , listing the
values at which most of the numerical simulations have been performed so far, in units of 1000
building blocks. The table is valid for the coupling constants (κ0 , ∆) = (2.2, 0.6), which is well
inside phase C.

is the partition function for a constant four-volume and SEin [gµν ] the gravitational
action without the cosmological term. The expectation values we are calculating
are thus
Z

Z
1
√
−S[gµν ]
hO(gµν )iV =
D[gµν ] O(gµν ) e
δ
g−V .
(209)
Z(V )
It is in principle possible to reconstruct the expectation values of observables for a
fixed value of the cosmological constant Λ by measuring the hO(gµν )iV for all V and
constructing Z(V ) (which cannot be measured as an observable in a Monte Carlo
simulation). This reconstruction is somewhat cumbersome but feasible, since the
(1,4)
(2,3)
action only depends on the “global” variables N0 , N4
and N4 . However, we
will restrict ourselves to the measurement of observables for fixed V .
(4,1)
(3,2)
The local moves do not in general preserve the numbers N4
and N4
of foursimplices, or their sum. We deal with this in a standard way which was developed
for dynamically triangulated models in dimensions three and four [10, 13] to ensure
that the system volume is peaked at a prescribed value, with a well-defined range
of fluctuations. Adapting it to the current situation of causal triangulations with
nonvanishing asymmetry ∆, we implement an approximate four-volume constraint
by adding a term
(4,1)
δS = ǫ|N4 − Ñ4 |,
(210)

to the Euclidean action (73), with typical values of ǫ lying in the range of 0.01 to
0.02, except during thermalization where we set ǫ = 0.05. The reason for fixing
(4,1)
(4,1)
(3,2)
N4
instead of N4 = N4 + N4
in eq. (210) is mere technical convenience.
We have checked in the phase space region relevant to four-dimensional quantum
(4,1)
gravity (phase C, see below) that for N4
fixed according to (210), the number
(3,2)
N4
of four-simplices of type (3,2) is likewise peaked sharply, see Fig. 16. The
“four-volumes” Ñ4 and the corresponding “true” discrete four-volumes N4 used in
the simulations are listed in Table 2 for (κ0 , ∆) = (2.2, 0.6) well inside phase C, at
the choice of coupling constants where most of our simulations are performed. In
order to stabilize the total volume after thermalization, κ4 has to be fine-tuned to its
pseudo-critical value (which depends weakly on the volume) with accuracy smaller
than ǫ, in practice to about 0.2ǫ. The measurements reported in this paper were
taken at Ñ4 = 10, 20, 40, 80 and 160k, and the runs were performed on individual
72

0,002

P (N4

(3,2)

)

0,0015

0,001

0,0005

0

0

50000

1e+05

1,5e+05
(3,2)
N4

2e+05

2,5e+05

3e+05

Figure 16: Unnormalized distribution of the number N4(3,2) of four-dimensional simplices of type
(4,1)

(3,2), at fixed numbers N4
κ0 = 2.2 and ∆ = 0.6.

= 40, 80 and 160k (left to right) of four-simplices of type (4,1), at

PCs or a PC farm for the smaller systems and a cluster of work stations for the
larger systems.
Before measurements can be performed, one needs a well thermalized configuration of a given volume. In order to double-check the quality of the thermalization,
we used two different methods to produce starting configurations for the measurement runs. In the first method, we evolved from an initial minimal four-dimensional
triangulation of prescribed topology and given time extension t, obtained by repeated gluing of a particular triangulated spacetime slice (a “slab”) of ∆t = 1 (one
lattice step in the time direction) and topology [0, 1] × S 3 , which consists of 30 foursimplices. The spatial in- and out-geometries of the slice are minimal spheres S 3 ,
made of five tetrahedra. The two types of spatial boundary conditions used are (i)
periodic identification of the geometries at initial and final integer times, and (ii)
free boundary conditions, where all vertices contained in the initial slice at time t0
are connected by timelike edges to a single vertex at time t0 −1, and similarly for
the vertices contained in the final spatial slice. From this initial configuration, the
geometry evolves to its target volume Ñ4 as specified in δS. During the evolution the
volume-volume correlator (to be defined below) was monitored and used to gauge
the auto-correlation of configurations. The number of sweeps to reach the thermalized configuration changes linearly with Ñ4 and ranged from 105 to 108 sweeps for
the largest volumes, the latter of which took several weeks on a work station.
In the second method, we started instead from a thermalized configuration of
smaller volume, which we let evolve towards the target volume. In this case the final
volume-volume distribution is reached from a narrower distribution, namely, that
73

of the smaller volume. During thermalization, this width grows very slowly. The
timing of the entire process is similar to that of the first method.

7.3

Phase structure of the model

As described above, the bare cosmological constant κ4 is tuned to its (pseudo)critical value in the simulations, tantamount to approaching the infinite-volume
limit. Depending on the values of the two remaining parameters κ0 and ∆ in the
discretized action (73), we have identified three different phases, A, B and C, mutually separated by phase transition lines [77, 78]. Fig. 17 shows the phase diagram,
(4,1)
based on computer simulations with N4
= 80.000 [81]. Because there are residual
finite-size effects for universes of this size, one can still expect minor changes in the
location of the transition lines as N4 → ∞. The dotted lines in Fig. 17 represent
mere extrapolations, and lie in a region of phase space which is difficult to access
due to inefficiencies of our computer algorithms. Thus the phase diagram is only
tentative where the lines are dotted, and in particular the triple point is our invention. However, once we are in the “bulk” of phase A, B and C there are no problems
with the simulations. Thus the phase diagram in Fig. 17 is essentially correct in
the sense that we have only observed these three phases. Also, moving away from
the putative triple point there is eventually no problem in identifying a transition
between phases A and B. We have not done so except for the single point shown
on Fig. 17 because this phase transition presently does not have our main interest
(since we do not know of an interesting continuum interpretation). In summary, the
most likely scenario, even without having identified part of the transition lines in
detail, is the one presented in Fig. 17.
We describe each of the three phases in turn:
(A) This phase prevails for sufficiently large κ0 (recall κ0 is proportional to the
inverse of the bare Newton’s constant). When plotting the volume of the
spatial slices of constant tn as a function of tn , we observe an irregular sequence
of maxima and minima, where the minimal size is of the order of the cutoff,
and the sizes of the maxima vary, see Fig. 18. The time intervals during which
the spacetime has a macroscopic spatial extension are small and of the order
of ∆n = 3 − 4, n being the subscript in tn .
(B) This phase occurs for sufficiently small κ0 and for small asymmetry ∆. In
it, spacetime undergoes a “spontaneous dimensional reduction” in the sense
that all four-simplices are concentrated in a slice of minimal time extension
between tn and tn+1 and tn and tn−1 , such that the three-volumes N3 (tk ) at
times tk is only large at time tn and remain close to their kinematic minimum
everywhere else (Fig. 19).
However, there is yet another phase where the dynamics is not reduced to just the
spatial directions but is genuinely four-dimensional.
74

0.8

0.6

C

0.4
∆

A
0.2
P0

0
Triple point

B
-0.2
0

1

2

3

4

5

K0

Figure 17: The phase diagram of four-dimensional quantum gravity, defined in terms of causal
dynamical triangulations, parametrized by the inverse bare gravitational coupling κ0 and the asymmetry parameter ∆.

(C) This phase occurs for sufficiently small κ0 and nonvanishing asymmetry ∆. In
this phase, where ∆ > 0 and α̃ < 1 (α̃ was defined above, eq. (72)), there seems
to be a sufficiently strong coupling between successive spatial slices to induce
a change in the spatial structure itself. We will discuss this new geometrical
structure in detail below in Sec. 8. Stated shortly, we observe a genuine fourdimensional universe, the blob shown in Fig. 20. This blob is four-dimensional
in the sense that as a function of the four-volume N4 , the time extent scales
1/4
3/4
as N4 and the spatial volume as N4 (see Fig. 20), and the blob itself is
independent of the total time extent ttotal chosen, as long as ttotal is larger than
the time extent of the blob.
We have performed measurements to determine the order of the transitions in the
CDT phase diagram. Based on our numerical investigation so far, the A-C transition
appears to be a first-order transition [81], while the B-C transition is second order
[82]. Below we report on some details of these measurements.
7.3.1

The A-C transition

The two graphs at the bottom of Fig. 21 illustrate the behaviour of N0 /N4 at the
A-C phase transition line. Since we can approach this line by changing the coupling
constant κ0 while keeping ∆ fixed, the quantity conjugate to κ0 (N4 is fixed), namely,
75

Figure 18: Monte Carlo snapshot of a typical universe in phase A (κ0 = 5.0, ∆ = 0), of discrete
volume N4 = 45.5k and total time extent (horizontal direction) ttotal = 50. In this and the following
two figures, the circumference at integer proper time tn is chosen proportional to the spatial threevolume N3 (tn ). The surface represents an interpolation between adjacent spatial volumes, without
capturing the actual four-dimensional connectivity between neighbouring spatial slices.

the ratio N0 /N4 , is a natural candidate for an order parameter. The graph at the
centre of Fig. 21 shows N0 /N4 as a function of Monte Carlo time. One sees clearly
that it jumps between two values, corresponding to the distinct nature of geometry
in phases A and C. We have checked that the geometry indeed “jumps” in the sense
that no smoothly interpolating typical configurations have been found. Lastly, we
have also established that the jump becomes more and more pronounced as the fourvolume N4 of the universe increases, further underlining the archetypical first-order
behaviour at this transition line.
The top graph in Fig. 21 shows the location of the universe along the vertical
“proper-time axis” (tn ∈ [0, 80], and to be periodically identified) as a function of
Monte Carlo time, plotted along the horizontal axis. The value of the spatial threevolume N3 (tn ) in the slice labeled by tn is colour-coded; the darker, the bigger the
volume at time tn . We can distinguish two types of behaviour as a function of Monte
Carlo time, (i) presence of an extended universe centred at and fluctuating weakly
around some location on the proper-time axis; (ii) absence of such a universe with
a well-defined “centre-of-volume”. The former is associated with the presence of a
distinct dark band in the figure, which disappears abruptly as a function of Monte
Carlo time, only to reappear at some different location tn later on in the simulation.
Comparing with the middle graph, it is clear that these abrupt changes in geometry
correlate perfectly with the changes of the order parameter N0 /N4 . When N0 /N4 is
small, we witness the extended universe of phase C, whose “equator” coincides with
the dark blue/red line of the colour plot. Conversely, at the larger values of N0 /N4
characteristic of phase A this structure disappears, to be replaced by an array of
universes too small to be individually identifiable on the plot. When jumping back to
76

Figure 19: Monte Carlo snapshot of a typical universe in phase B (κ0 = 1.6, ∆ = 0), of discrete
volume N4 = 22.25k and total time extent ttotal = 50. The entire universe has collapsed into a slice
of minimal time extension.
phase C the centre-of-volume of the single, extended universe reappears at a different
location in time. Finally, the bottom graph in Fig. 21 illustrates the double-peak
structure of the distribution of the values taken by the order parameter N0 /N4 .

7.4

The B-C transition

Our measurements to determine the character of the B-C transition are depicted in
an analogous manner in Fig. 22. Since we are varying ∆ to reach this transition
from inside phase C, we have chosen the variable conjugate to ∆ in the action (73)
(4,1)
(up to a constant normalization N4 ), conj(∆) = (−6N0 + N4 )/N4 , as our order
parameter. Looking at the graph at the centre, we see that this parameter exhibits
the jumping behaviour as a function of Monte Carlo time that is characteristic of
a first-order transition. Small values of the parameter indicate the system is in
phase C, while large values correspond to phase B. The time extent of the universe
diminishes as one approaches the phase transition line from phase C, and is close
to zero when we are at the transition line. It is zero when we cross the line. Some
indication of this behaviour is given by the colour-coded three-volume profile N3 (t)
as a function of the Monte Carlo time in the top graph of Fig. 22. In phase B, only
one lattice time tn has a number of tetrahedra N3 (tn ) much larger than zero. The
“universe” is concentrated on a single time slice, while well inside phase C it has a
nontrivial time extension. The bottom graph in Fig. 22 again shows the double-peak
structure of the order parameter.
Looking at Fig. 22 and comparing it with the previous Fig. 21, the evidence for
a first-order transition at the B-C phase boundary seems even more clear-cut than
in the case of the A-C transition.
However, a double peak for a given N4 does not tell us whether the transition is
77

Figure 20: Monte Carlo snapshot of a typical universe in phase C (κ0 = 2.2, ∆ = 0.6) of discrete
volume N4 = 91.1k and total time extent ttotal = 80.
first or second order. One has to establish how the double peak behaves as a function
of N4 . If the size of the peaks increases and the separation of the peaks does not
diminish when N4 increases it is a strong signal that the transition is first order.
This appears to be the situation for the A-C transition. For the B-C transition
the opposite happens: the peaks approach each other, approximately as 1/N4, and
the height of the peaks relative to the minimum between the peaks also diminishes,
again approximately as 1/N4 . This is shown in Fig. 23. Thus the peak structure
does not have the characteristics of a first-order transition.
In order to establish that we are really dealing with a higher-order transition we
have looked at various critical exponents. They all point to a higher-order transition.
We will limit the discussion here to the so-called shift exponent, ν̃ (for a detailed
discussion we refer to [82]), defined as follows. For fixed κ0 , we vary the coupling
constant ∆ to reach a critical point on the B-C phase transition line. For a system
of finite volume, the precise definition of the critical ∆c is ambiguous, since there is
strictly speaking only a phase transition for N4 = ∞. We choose to define ∆c (N4 )
using the location of the maximum of the susceptibility χconj(∆) = hconj(∆)2 i −
hconj(∆)i2 . One expects a N4 -dependence of the form
−1/ν̃

∆c (N4 ) = ∆c (∞) − CN4

,

(211)

with a first-order transition characterized by ν̃ = 1. Thus observing a ν̃ different
from 1 is a signal of a higher order transition.
Figure 24 displays the data and the best fit for κ0 = 2.2. We have not included
error bars because they turned out to be smaller than the data point dots. The
best fit through all data points yields ν̃ = 2.40 ± 0.03, which is far from the value
ν̃ = 1 characterizing a first-order transition. We can perform similar measurements
for the other values of κ0 along the B-C transition line which are shown in Fig. 17
78

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1.5e+06

2e+06

2.5e+06

3e+06

3.5e+06

4e+06

4.5e+06

5e+06

0.164
N0/N4

0.162
0.16
0.158
0.156
0.154
1.5e+06

2e+06

2.5e+06

3e+06

3.5e+06

4e+06

4.5e+06

5e+06

1000
N0/N4

800
600
400
200
0
0.152

0.154

0.156

0.158

0.16

0.162

0.164

Figure 21: Transition between phases C (smaller κ0 ) and A (larger κ0 ) at κ0 = 4.711 and
∆ = 0.6 for N4 = 120k. We observe that configurations jump between two regimes, which is a
strong evidence of first-order transition. Top: Density plot of the spatial volume as a function of
Monte Carlo simulation time (horizontal axis) and slicing time tn (vertical axis). Darker colours
mean larger spatial volumes N3 (tn ). Middle: Order parameter N0 /N4 , conjugate to κ0 , as a
function of Monte Carlo time. Bottom: Distribution of the values taken by the order parameter
N0 /N4 , exhibiting a double-peak structure.

and establish that for these points the transition seems to be of second (or higher)
order.
It would be interesting to perform the same measurements moving along the B-C
transition line towards the conjectured triple point. However we need more a more
efficient algorithm15 . It is possible that a multicanonical algorithm can deal better
with the double-peak structure which seems to get more pronounced when we move
15

As described above, we are basically using the simplest Metropolis algorithm for updating
geometry, using the local moves. This local algorithm might be very inefficient when it comes
to changing certain types of geometries. In four-dimensional Euclidean DT gravity, one type of
geometry which could be created was a so-called baby universe, only connected to the rest of the
universe with a thin “neck”. These baby universes were both a blessing and a curse. By counting
them one could measure the so-called susceptibility exponent of the partition function [79], but
the local moves had a hard time getting rid of them, once they were created. This issue could
be resolved by inventing an algorithm that cut away the baby universes in one place and glued
them back onto the triangulation in another [80]. This “baby-universe surgery” decreased the
auto-correlation time in the simulations by several orders of magnitude. We have been searching
for a similar algorithm in the CDT case, but so far without success.

79

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
100000
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
100000

200000

300000

400000

500000

600000

700000

800000

900000

1e+06

conj(∆)/N4

200000

300000

400000

500000

600000

700000

800000

900000

400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

1e+06

conj(∆)/N4

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

Figure 22: Transition between phases C (larger ∆) and B (smaller ∆) at κ0 = 2.2 and ∆ = 0.022
for N4 = 40k. Although the configurations jump between two regimes, the effect gets weaker with
increasing total volume N4 . Thus the jump cannot be taken as evidence of a first-order transition.
Top: Density plot of the spatial volume as a function of Monte Carlo simulation time (horizontal
axis) and slicing time i (vertical axis). Darker colours mean larger spatial volumes N3 (tn ). Middle:
Order parameter (N41 − 6N0 )/N4 , conjugate to ∆, as a function of Monte Carlo time. Bottom:
Distribution of the values taken by the order parameter, again exhibiting a double-peak structure.
towards the conjectured triple point.
We have not studied the A-B transition in any detail since it seems not interesting
from a gravitational point of view, where we want to start out in a phase with an
extended, quasi-classical four-dimensional universe, i.e. in phase C.

7.5

Relation to Hořava-Lifshitz gravity

We can now give the following qualitative characterization of the three phases in
terms of what we will provisionally call “average geometry”. As we will show below,
the universe of phase C exhibits a classical four-dimensional background geometry
on large scales. We may rephrase this by saying that hgeometryi 6= 0. One may
even argue that hgeometryi = const., in view of the fact that according to the
minisuperspace analysis of [83, 84, 85, 86] – to be presented below – the universe
can be identified with a round S 4 , the maximally symmetric de Sitter space of
constant scalar curvature. By contrast, in phase B the universe presumably has

80

Figure 23: Histograms of conj(∆) at the B-C transition for three different system sizes (40K,
80K and 160K). The histograms are normalized to probability distributions. By fine-tuning ∆, one
can achieve that the two peaks have the same height. We have not done this because it is quite
time-consuming.

no extension or trace of classicality, corresponding to “hgeometryi = 0”. Lastly,
in phase A, the geometry of the universe appears to be “oscillating” in the time
direction. The three phases are separated by three phase transition lines which we
have conjectured to meet in a triple point as illustrated in Fig. 17.
We have chosen this particular qualitative description to match precisely that of
a Lifshitz phase diagram [87]. In an effective Lifshitz theory, the Landau free energy
density F (x) as function of an order parameter φ(x) takes the form16
F (x) = a2 φ(x)2 + a4 φ(x)4 + a6 φ(x)6 + · · ·
+c2 (∂α φ)2 + d2 (∂β φ)2 + e2 (∂β2 φ)2 + · · · ,

(212)

where for a d-dimensional system α = m + 1, . . . , d, β = 1, . . . , m. Distinguishing
between “α”- and “β”-directions allows one to take anisotropic behaviour into account. For a usual system, m = 0 and a phase transition can occur when a2 passes
through zero (say, as a function of temperature). For a2 > 0 we have φ = 0, while for
a2 < 0 we have |φ| > 0 (always assuming a4 > 0). However, one also has a transition
when anisotropy is present (m > 0) and d2 passes through zero. For negative d2
one can then have an oscillating behaviour of φ in the m “β”-directions. Depending
on the sign of a2 , the transition to this so-called modulated or helical phase can
occur either from the phase where φ = 0, or from the phase where |φ| > 0. We
16

see, for example, [88] for an introduction to the content and scope of “Landau theory”

81

0.05
0.045
0.04
0.035
c

∆

0.03
0.025
0.02
0.015
40

60

80

100

120

140

160

Ν4 / 1000

Figure 24: This plot shows measurements of B-C transition points at κ0 = 2.2 for different
system sizes, which allow to determine the shift exponent ν̃.
conclude that the phases C, B, and A of CDT quantum gravity depicted in Fig. 17
can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with the ferromagnetic, paramagnetic
and helical phases of the Lifshitz phase diagram17 . The triple point where the three
phases meet is the so-called Lifshitz point.
The critical dimension beyond which the mean-field Lifshitz theory alluded to
above is believed to be valid is dc = 4 + m/2. In lower dimensions, the fluctuations
play an important role and so does the number of components of the field φ. This
does not necessarily affect the general structure of the phase diagram, but can alter
the order of the transitions. Without entering into the details of the rather complex
general situation, let us just mention that for m = 1 fluctuations will often turn
the transition along the A-C phase boundary into a first-order transition. Likewise,
most often the transition between phases B and C is of second order.
As mentioned in the Introduction P. Hořava has suggested recently a new class
of quantum gravity theories [26]. The basic idea is that in a theory of quantum
gravity one should insist on manifest unitarity as well as renormalizability. These
two requirements clash when we use the Einstein-Hilbert action. It contains only
second-order time derivatives and in this respect has a chance to be unitary, but it
is not renormalizable as we have discussed in detail. In order to obtain a renormalizable theory one can add higher-curvature terms like R2 to the action. Expanding the
action around flat spacetime, higher-derivative terms will appear in the quadratic
part, making the propagators better behaved at large momenta. As also mentioned
17
For definiteness, we are using here a “magnetic” language for the Lifshitz diagram. However,
the Lifshitz diagram can also describe a variety of other systems, for instance, liquid crystals.

82

in Sec. 1 one can prove that a number of such theories is renormalizable [21]. However, it is believed that in general they will not be unitary, the unitarity being spoiled
by the higher-order time derivatives which appear in the propagators. Covariance
implies that higher-order derivatives result in higher-order time derivatives, which
usually lead to acausal propagation. This conundrum can be avoided if we give up
covariance and allow space and time to behave differently. Having higher-derivative
spatial terms but only second-order time derivatives in the equations of motion
makes it possible to construct a unitary and renormalizable theory. The price one
pays is that local Lorentz invariance is broken. Since we know that Lorentz invariance is valid to a good approximation at large distances, the terms which break
Lorentz invariance have to be suitably small, such that they only play an important
role at high (spatial) momenta. Hořava used the Lifshitz free energy (212) as an
example where higher-derivative terms play an important role and where there is
asymmetry between the various (spatial) directions18 .
From the above discussion it should be clear that our CDT program effectively
has a lot in common with the Hořava program, although our primary intention is
to provide a regularization of a covariant theory of gravity. Our starting point is
different too, being a sum over geometries on spacetimes with Lorentzian signature.
In this sense we are not breaking any symmetry between space and time. However,
after rotating to Euclidean signature geometries it is clear that in the path-integral
histories we effectively treat one direction (the former time direction) differently
from the space directions. In addition, as we have explained in the Introduction,
the effective action corresponding to a nontrivial fixed point will have only a vague
memory of the bare action we put in by hand, since entropic contributions are going
to be important. It is possible therefore that this effective action has some Lifshitzlike features. We have already noted that by using geometry in a loose sense as an
order parameter, Fig. 17 resembles closely a Lifshitz phase diagram. Furthermore,
as described above, CDT quantum gravity has a reflection-positive transfer matrix,
pointing to a unitary theory, again in line with the philosophy of Hořava.
Let us finally try to understand in more detail the reason for the phase transitions in geometry observed in Fig. 17. Let us recall some results from the earlier
attempt to formulate a fully Euclidean theory of quantum gravity using dynamical
triangulations (DT). This gravity theory was defined by summing over all Euclidean
geometries of a fixed topology, approximating the sum by the piecewise linear geometries obtained by using DT [13, 14, 19]. The weight of a geometry was given by
the Regge action, as described above, with an even simpler action because all foursimplices are identical. As for CDT we have a bare gravitational coupling constant
1/κ0 and a bare cosmological coupling constant κ4 (which is traded in the computer
simulations for a fixed number of four-simplices).
18

In the Lifshitz free energy density (212) all directions are of course spatial directions, but the
derivative terms break the symmetry. In the Hořava-Lifshitz model, the asymmetry is between
space directions and time. After a formal rotation to Euclidean signature the Hořava Lagrangian
would be a Lifshitz-like free energy density.

83

One observed two phases as function of κ0 [13, 18, 14, 19]. One phase, called the
“crumpled phase” is characterized by having essentially no extension, no matter how
large one chooses N4 . This happens because a few links and their vertices acquire
a very high order, such that they are shared by almost all four-simplices [89]. This
phase occurs for small values of κ0 , in particular, for κ0 = 0. For κ0 = 0, when the
number N4 of simplices is fixed, there is no action, but only the entropy of the configurations. These “crumpled” triangulations are the generic, entropically preferred
triangulations. However, when κ0 is increased, i.e. the bare gravitational coupling
constant is decreased, a first-order phase transition takes place.19 Instead of having
no extension, the generic triangulation in this other phase has a maximal linear extension, i.e. a branched-polymer structure20 . These polymer-like configurations are
important even in d = 2 where they become dominant at the so-called c = 1 barrier
of noncritical string theory [91, 92, 93]. This barrier reflects the appearance of the
tachyon of bosonic string theory, which means that the effective Euclidean action
becomes unbounded from below. A related unboundedness is present in Euclidean
quantum gravity due to the conformal factor. The phase transition between the
crumpled and the branched-polymer phase can be viewed as a transition between a
phase where entropy dominates and a phase where the conformal factor dominates.
Since the entropy of the configurations is independent of the bare coupling constant
κ0 , it is natural that the bare action will start to dominate for large values of κ0 , i.e.
small values of the bare gravitational coupling constant, a phenomenon we already
discussed in the Introduction.
Given this scenario it is tempting to view the A-C and A-B phase transitions,
which occur when changing κ0 , as the CDT manifestation of the dominance of
branched polymers for large values of κ0 . Although we have only constructed an
effective action well inside phase C in Fig. 17 (see below for details), the Lifshitz
picture fits well with the above remarks about instability of the conformal factor
in Euclidean quantum gravity. As described below, well inside phase C we have a
positive kinetic term for the scale factor. This term comes from entropic contributions to the effective action since the scale factor coming from the bare action
will contribute with a negative kinetic term (leading to the unboundedness of the
Euclidean bare action in the continuum limit).21 As we increase κ0 , the coefficient of
the kinetic term will decrease since the bare action part will become more and more
dominant, and eventually go through zero. In the Lifshitz theory this is exactly the
19

First it was believed that the transition was second order, which generated some excitement
since a scenario like the one outlined by eqs. (199)-(206) would then provide the basis for a continuum theory. However, when larger four-volumes were used it was understood that the transition
was most likely a first-order transition [90].
20
A branched polymer is a tree graph. Of course the triangulation is really d-dimensional, but
the d−1 dimensions have little extension.
21
We have emphasized the nonperturbative nature of this cure for the gravitational “conformal
sickness” inside phase C since the early days of CDT research [94]. How an analogous mechanism
may play out in a continuum path-integral formulation through Faddeev-Popov contributions to
the measure has been discussed in [95].

84

point where the coefficient d2 in the Landau free energy density (212) becomes zero
and we (usually) have a first-order transition to the oscillatory phase, with negative
d2 . This is precisely what we observe! We have not attempted to construct the effective action in the “oscillatory” phase A, but the qualitative description seems quite
consistent. It would have been even more interesting if the A-C phase transition
had been second order, but the situation here seems to be rather like in Euclidean
DT in that the transition seems to be first order, and thus not suited for taking a
continuum limit of the lattice theory.
In this respect, the transition from phase C to B seems to be more interesting,
since it appears to be of second order. In the Lifshitz theory it is an “ordinary”
phase transition from an ordered phase C to a disordered phase B. Above we used the
somewhat vague label of “average geometry” as order parameter in the gravitational
case. In Fig. 20 we depict a configuration in phase C as it is generated by the
computer. As stated there (and to be discussed in detail below), this “blob” scales
with N4 , as if it were a real, four-dimensional universe. The parameter ∆ we have
introduced is in some ways a trivial parameter. If we take the microscopic picture
seriously, it just redefines the length ratio at /as between time- and spacelike links,
while the Regge action used is still the Einstein-Hilbert action of the corresponding
geometry. If entropic terms were unimportant, one would simply expect to see the
same “physical” universes on average. Looking at Fig. 2 we see that large values of
∆ correspond to small α̃. As a consequence, if we plot the universe using a graphic
representation where the temporal and spatial lattice steps are chosen identical, the
universes should appear increasingly elongated for increasing ∆. This is precisely
what we observe (see Fig. 28), contrary to the situation when we change κ0 (see Fig.
27). In other words, deep inside phase C we have at least qualitative evidence for
the independence of the geometric universe of the parameter ∆. Quantitatively, this
is harder to nail down, and at any rate becomes increasingly inaccurate when we
approach the B-C phase transition line by decreasing ∆. One possible explanation
is that entropic contributions mix with the bare action terms and one should not
put too much emphasis on the microscopic interpretation of the various terms in the
action. When we approach the phase transition line, the time extent of the universe
will shrink to a few lattice spacings as described above (for the sizes of universe we
have studied). After crossing the transition line the universe has collapsed, at least
on the part of the B-C line we have been able to investigate. This signals that an
asymmetry between space and time has developed. It is natural to conjecture that
the transition is related to the breaking of this symmetry.
Of course, in Hořava’s scenario one would exactly expect such an asymmetry
since space and time in the UV regime are assigned different dimensions. How
would one observe such a difference in the present lattice approach? Consider a
universe of time extent T , spatial extension L and total four-volume V4 (T, L). By
measuring T and L we can establish the mutual relations
1/d
T ∝ V4 t ,

L∝



1−1/dt
V4

85

1/ds

∝ T (dt −1)/ds .

(213)

Well inside phase C we find dt = 4 and ds = 3, in agreement with what is expected
for an ordinary four-dimensional spacetime. If the dimension [T] of time was z times
the dimension [L] of length we would have
z=

ds
.
dt − 1

(214)

Well inside phase B both ds and dt must be large, if not infinite. Since the B-C
phase transition appears to be of second order, it is possible that z goes to a value
different from 1 when we approach the transition line. One could even imagine that
z is a function of the position on the B-C line. Hořava suggested that z = 3 for
four-dimensional quantum gravity. By direct measurement we find that for ∆ > 0.3
one obtains convincingly dt ≈ 4 and ds ≈ 3 and thus z ≈ 1, but for smaller ∆ the
quality of our results does not allow for any definite statements. Auto-correlation
times seem to become very long and there may be large finite-volume effects, which
obscure the measurements which are precisely based on finite-size scaling.
A situation where z is a function of the position on the B-C transition line would
be interesting. It highlights one aspect of the phase diagram of Fig. 17 which is
different from the standard Lifshitz diagram, namely, that the B-C line ends for
sufficiently small κ0 . One can envisage several intriguing scenarios where z changes
as one moves along the phase transition line. For example, z may change from
the Hořava value 3 at the tricritical point where the A, B and C phases meet to
1 (corresponding to isotropy between space and time) at the left end point of the
B-C transition line. Or perhaps the opposite is true, namely, that the conjectured
triple point, and not the end point, is the point of isotropy. Such a scenario is
also appealing, since it singles out the isotropy point more distinctly and naturally
from a renormalization group point of view. However, it would fit less well into
the Hořava-Lifshitz picture. Presently neither of these is supported by the numerical data, since the numerical problems mentioned above make precise statements
difficult. Much work remains to be done to understand which of these scenarios
is realized. Primarily, we need better algorithms to beat the critical slowing down
when approaching the B-C line. – In the remainder of this article we will discuss
the physics one can extract from the universes we observe well inside phase C.

8

The macroscopic de Sitter universe

The Monte Carlo simulations referred to above will generate a sequence of spacetime
histories. An individual spacetime history is not an observable, in the same way as
a path x(t) of a particle in the quantum-mechanical path integral is not. However,
it is perfectly legitimate to talk about the expectation value hx(t)i as well as the
fluctuations around hx(t)i. Both of these quantities are in principle calculable in
quantum mechanics.
Let us make a slight digression and discuss the situation in some more detail,
since it illustrates well the picture we also hope to emerge in a theory of quantum
86

a

x
xf

xi
tf t

ti

Figure 25: Piecewise linear spacetime histories in quantum mechanics. The paths shown are
from Monte Carlo simulations of a harmonic oscillator, rotated to Euclidean time. We show a
number of such histories as well as the average path (thick line).

gravity. Consider the particle shown in Fig. 25, moving from point xi at time
ti to point xf at time tf . In general there will be a classical particle trajectory
satisfying these boundary conditions (which we will assume for simplicity). If ~ can
be considered small compared to the other parameters entering into the description
of the system, the classical path will be a good approximation to hx(t)i according
to Ehrenfest’s theorem. The smooth curve in Fig. 25 represents the average path
hx(t)i. In the path integral we sum over all continuous paths from (xi , ti ) to (xf , tf ),
as also illustrated by Fig. 25. However, when all other parameters in the problem
are large compared to ~ we expect a “typical” path to be close to hx(t)i, which will
also be close to the classical trajectory. Let us make this explicit in the simple case
of the harmonic oscillator. Let xcl (t) denote the solution to the classical equations
of motion such that xcl (ti ) = xi and xcl (tf ) = xf . For the harmonic oscillator the
decomposition
x(t) = xcl (t) + y(t), y(ti ) = y(tf ) = 0
(215)
leads to an exact factorization of the path integral thanks to the quadratic nature of
the action. The part involving xcl (t) gives precisely the classical action and the part
involving y(t) the contributions from the fluctuations, independent of the classical
part. Again for a quadratic action one has the exact equality hx(t)i = xcl (t), which
however is not really important for the arguments that follow. Taking the classical
path to be macroscopic gives a picture of a macroscopic path dressed with small
quantum fluctuations, small because they are independent of the classical motion.

87

Explicitly, we have for the fluctuations (in a Euclidean-signature calculation)


cosh ω(tf − ti ) − cosh ω(tf + ti − 2t)
~
2
.
(216)
y (t) =
2mω
sinh ω(tf − ti )
This is a simple illustration of what we hope for in quantum gravity. Once we set
the system size (by hand) to be macroscopic – in the present example by choosing a
macroscopic xcl (t) – the quantum fluctuations around it are small and of the order
r
~
.
(217)
h|y|i ≈
2mω
We hope that the dynamics of the universe is amenable to a similar logic: its macroscopic size is determined by the (inverse) cosmological constant in any Euclidean
description22 , and the small quantum fluctuations around it are dictated by the
other coupling constant, namely, Newton’s constant.
Obviously, there are many more dynamical variables in quantum gravity than
there are in the particle case. We can still imitate the quantum-mechanical situation
by picking out a particular one, for example, the spatial three-volume V3 (t) at proper
time t. We can measure both its expectation value hV3 (t)i as well as fluctuations
around it. The former gives us information about the large-scale “shape” of the
universe we have created in the computer. In this section, we will describe the
measurements of hV3 (t)i, keeping a more detailed discussion of the fluctuations to
Sec. 10 below.
A “measurement” of V3 (t) consists of a table N3 (i), where
PN i = 1, . . . , N labels the
time slices. Recall from eq. (210) that the sum over slices i=1 N3 (i) is basically kept
(4,1)
constant (N4
= 2N3 ). The time axis has a total length of N time steps, where
N = 80 in the actual simulations, and we have cyclically identified time slice N + 1
with time slice 1. As is clear from Fig. 20 this identification has no consequences
for the physics of the “blob”, as long as the number of time steps N is sufficiently
large compared to the time extension of the “blob”.
What we observe in the simulations [77, 78] is that for the range of discrete
volumes N4 under study the universe does not extend (i.e. has appreciable threevolume) over the entire time axis, but rather is localized in a region much shorter
than 80 time slices. Outside this region the spatial extension N3 (i) will be minimal,
consisting of the minimal number (five) of tetrahedra needed to form a three-sphere
S 3 , plus occasionally a few more tetrahedra.23 This thin “stalk” therefore carries
little four-volume and in a given simulation we can for most practical purposes
consider the total four-volume of the remainder, the extended universe, as fixed.
22

This is trivial to show in the model by simply differentiating the partition function with respect
to the cosmological constant; in the simulations it is therefore put in by hand.
23
This kinematical constraint ensures that the triangulation remains a simplicial manifold in
which, for example, two d-simplices are not allowed to have more than one (d − 1)-simplex in
common.

88

In order to perform a meaningful average over geometries which explicitly refers
to the extended part of the universe, we have to remove the translational zero mode
which is present [83, 84]. During the Monte Carlo simulations the extended universe
will fluctuate in shape and its centre of mass (or, more to the point, its centre of
volume) will perform a slow random walk along the time axis. Since we are dealing
with a circle (the compactified time axis), the centre of volume is not uniquely
defined (it is clearly arbitrary for a constant volume distribution), and we must first
define what we mean by such a concept. Here we take advantage of the empirical
fact that our dynamically generated universes decompose into an extended piece
and a stalk, with the latter containing less than one per cent of the total volume.
We are clearly interested in a definition such that the centre of volume of a given
configuration lies in the centre of the extended region. One also expects that any
sensible definition will be unique up to contributions related to the stalk and to the
discreteness of the time steps. In total this amounts to an ambiguity of the centre
of volume of one lattice step in the time direction.
In analyzing the computer data we have chosen one specific definition which is
in accordance with the discussion above24 . Maybe surprisingly, it turns out that
the inherent ambiguity in the choice of a definition of the centre of volume – even
if it is only of the order of one lattice spacing – will play a role later on in our
analysis of the quantum fluctuations. For each universe used in the measurements
(a “path” in the gravitational path integral) we will denote the centre-of-volume
time coordinate calculated by our algorithm by icv . From now on, when comparing
different universes, i.e. when performing ensemble averages, we will redefine the
temporal coordinates according to
N3new (i) = N3 (1 + mod(i + icv − 1, N)),

(219)

such that the centre of volume is located at 0.
Having defined in this manner the centre of volume along the time direction of our
spacetime configurations we can now perform superpositions of such configurations
and define the average hN3 (i)i as a function of the discrete time i. The results of
measuring the average discrete spatial size of the universe at various discrete times
24

Explicitly, we consider the quantity
N/2−1
′

CV (i ) =

X

(i + 0.5)N3 (1 + mod(i′ + i − 1, N ))

(218)

i=−N/2

where mod(i,N) is defined as the remainder, on division of i by N , and find the value of i′ ∈
{1, . . . , N } for which CV (i′ ) is smallest. We denote this i′ by icv . If there is more than one
minimum, we choose the value which has the largest three-volume N3 (i′ ). Let us stress that this is
just one of many definitions of icv . All other sensible definitions will for the type of configurations
considered here agree to within one lattice spacing.

89

i are illustrated in Fig. 26 and can be succinctly summarized by the formula [83, 84]
!
i
N
3
1
4
cos3
,
(220)
N3cl (i) := hN3 (i)i =
1/4
2(1 + ξ) 4 s0 N41/4
s0 N4
where N3 (i) denotes the number of three-simplices in the spatial slice at discretized
time i and N4 the total number of four-simplices in the entire universe. The constants
ξ and s0 depend on κ0 and ∆, and ξ is defined as follows. According to the formulas
for four-volumes for a given ∆ in (73), and thus in principle a given asymmetry
parameter α̃, the continuum Euclidean four-volume of the universe is given by
√
 √8α̃ − 3
12α̃ − 7 (3,2) 
(4,1)
4
√
√
V4 = C4 a
,
(221)
N4 +
N4
5
5
√
where C4 = 5/96 is the four-volume of an equilateral four-simplex with edge length
a = 1. It is convenient to rewrite expression (221) as
(4,1)

V4 = C̃4 (ξ) a4 N4
where ξ is the ratio

= C̃4 (ξ) a4 N4 /(1 + ξ),

(3,2)

ξ = N4

(4,1)

/N4

,

(222)
(223)

and C̃4 (ξ) a4 is a measure of the “effective four-volume” of an “average” four-simplex.
(4,1)
Since we are keeping N4
fixed in the simulations and since ξ changes with the
choice of bare coupling constants, it is sometimes convenient to rewrite (220) as
!
1 (4,1) 3
i
1
N3cl (i) = N4
cos3
,
(224)
(4,1)
(4,1)
1/4
2
4 s̃0 (N4 )
s̃0 (N4 )1/4
(4,1)

1/4

where s̃0 is defined by s̃0 (N4 )1/4 = s0 N4 . Of course, formula (220) is only valid
in the extended part of the universe where the spatial three-volumes are larger than
the minimal cutoff size.
The data shown in Fig. 26 have been collected at the particular values (κ0 , ∆) =
(2.2, 0.6) of the bare coupling constants and for N4 = 362.000 (corresponding to
(4,1)
N4
= 160.000). For these values of (κ0 , ∆) we find s0 = 0.59 and have verified
relation (220) for N4 ranging from 45.500 to 362.000 building blocks (45.500, 91.000,
181.000 and 362.000). After rescaling the time and volume variables by suitable
powers of N4 according to relation (220), and plotting them in the same way as in
Fig. 26, one finds almost total agreement between the curves for different spacetime
3/4
volumes.25 Eq. (220) shows that spatial volumes scale according to N4 and time
1/4
intervals according to N4 , as one would expect for a genuinely four-dimensional
25

By contrast, the quantum fluctuations indicated in Fig. 26 as vertical bars are volumedependent. After a rescaling which puts universes of different size on the same curve, the quantum
fluctuations will be the larger the smaller the total four-volume, see Sec. 10 below for details.

90

9000
8000
7000

hN3 (i)i

6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

40

i

Figure 26: Background geometry hN3 (i)i: MC measurements for fixed N4(4,1) = 160.000 (N4 =

362.000) and best fit (220) yield indistinguishable curves at given plot resolution. The bars indicate
the average size of quantum fluctuations.

spacetime. This strongly suggests a translation of relation (220) to a continuum
notation. The most natural identification is via a proper-time gauge choice
ds2 = gtt dt2 + gij dxi dxj ,
suggested by the CDT setup. With this choice we have
 
t
3
√
3
cl
gtt V3 (t) = V4
,
cos
4B
B

(225)

(226)

where we have made the identifications
ti
i
,
=
1/4
B
s0 N4
such that

Z

√
∆ti gtt V3 (ti ) = 2C̃4 N3 (i)a4 ,

(227)

√
dt gtt V3 (t) = V4 .

(228)

√
In the second of relations (227), gtt is the constant proportionality factor between
√
the time t and genuine continuum proper time τ , τ = gtt t. (The combination
√
∆ti gtt V3 contains C̃4 , related to the four-volume of a four-simplex rather than the
three-volume corresponding to a tetrahedron, because its time integral must equal
91

√
V4 .) Writing V4 = 8π 2 r 4 /3, and gtt = r/B, eq. (226) is seen to describe a Euclidean
de Sitter universe (a four-sphere, the maximally symmetric space for positive cosmological constant) as our searched-for, dynamically generated background geometry!
In the parametrization of (226) this is the classical solution to the action
!
Z
2
1
g tt V˙3 (t)
√
1/3
dt gtt
+ k2 V3 (t) − λV3 (t) ,
(229)
S=
24πG
V3 (t)
where k2 = 9(2π 2 )2/3R and λ is a Lagrange multiplier, fixed by requiring that the total
√
four-volume be V4 , dt gtt V3 (t) = V4 . Up to an overall sign, this is precisely the
Einstein-Hilbert action for the scale factor a(t) of a homogeneous, isotropic universe
[22]


Z
λ 3
3π
√
tt
2
dt gtt g a(t)ȧ (t) + a(t) − a (t) ,
(230)
S=−
2G
9

rewritten in terms of the spatial three-volume V3 (t) = 2π 2 a(t)3 , although we of
course never put any such simplifying symmetry assumptions into the CDT model.
For a fixed, finite four-volume V4 and when applying scaling arguments it can
be convenient to rewrite eq. (229) in terms of dimensionless units by introducing
1/4
3/4
s = t/V4 and V3 (t) = V4 v3 (s), in which case (229) becomes
√ Z

 ss 2
√
V4
g v˙3 (s)
1
1/3
ds gss
+ k2 v3 (s) ,
(231)
S=
24π G
v3 (s)
R √
now assuming that ds gss v3 (s) = 1, and with gss ≡ gtt . A discretized, dimensionless version of (229) is

X  (N3 (i + 1) − N3 (i))2
1/3
+ k̃2 N3 (i) ,
(232)
Sdiscr = k1
N3 (i)
i

where k̃2 ∝ k2 . This can be seen by applying the scaling (220), namely, N3 (i) =
3/4
1/4
N4 n3 (si ) and si = i/N4 . With this scaling, the action (232) becomes
!

2
p X
n3 (si+1 ) − n3 (si )
1
1/3
+ k̃2 n3 (si ) ,
(233)
∆s
Sdiscr = k1 N4
n3 (si )
∆s
i
where ∆s = 1/N 1/4 , and therefore has the same form as (231). This enables us to
finally conclude that the identifications (227) when used in the action (232) lead
naı̈vely to the continuum expression (229) under the identification
p
a2 C̃4 s̃20
√ .
G=
(234)
k1 3 6

Comparing the kinetic terms in (232) and (229) in more detail,
X (N3 (i + 1) − N3 (i))2
1 X (V3 (ti + ∆ti ) − V3 (ti ))2
= k1
,
√
24πG i
∆ti gti ti V3 (ti )
N
(i)
3
i
92

(235)

10000

κ0 = 3.6
κ0 = 2.2

8000

hN3 (i)i

6000

4000

2000

0
-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

40

i

Figure 27: The measured average shape hN3 (i)i of the quantum universe at ∆ = 0.6, for κ0 =
(4,1)

2.2 (broader distribution) and κ0 = 3.6 (narrower distribution), taken at N4

= 160.000.

and using eq. (227) leads to
p
2 C̃4
a4
G=
.
k1 24π gti ti (∆ti )2

(236)

Eq. (234) now follows from the equations
(∆ti )2 =

V4 =

B2
√ ,
s20 N4

s̃20 = s20

8π 2 4
C̃4
r =
N4 a4 ,
3
1+ξ

p

1 + ξ,

gti ti =

r2
.
B2

(237)

(238)

Next, let us comment on the universality of these results. First, we have checked
that they are not dependent on the particular definition of time slicing we have been
using, in the following sense. By construction of the piecewise linear CDT geometries
we have at each integer time step ti = i at a spatial surface consisting of N3 (i)
tetrahedra. Alternatively, one can choose as reference slices for the measurements of
the spatial volume non-integer values of time, for example, all time slices at discrete
times i − 1/2, i = 1, 2, .... In this case the “triangulation” of the spatial threespheres consists of tetrahedra – from cutting a (4,1)- or a (1,4)-simplex half-way –
and “boxes” (prisms), obtained by cutting a (2,3)- or (3,2)-simplex (as discussed in
93

25000

∆ = 0.2
∆ = 0.6

20000

hN3 (i)i

15000

10000

5000

0
-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

40

i

Figure 28: The measured average shape hN3 (i)i of the quantum universe at κ0 = 2.2, for ∆ =
(4,1)

0.6 (broad distribution) and ∆= 0.2 (narrow distribution), both taken at N4

= 160.000.

Sec. 6). We again find a relation like (220) if we use the total number of spatial
building blocks in the intermediate slices (tetrahedra+boxes) instead of just the
tetrahedra.
Second, we have repeated the measurements for other values of the bare coupling
constants. As long as we stay in the phase C well away from the boundaries, a
relation like (220) remains valid. In addition, the value of s0 , defined in eq. (220), is
almost unchanged until we get close to the phase transition lines beyond which the
extended universe disappears. Fig. 27 shows the average shape hN3 (i)i for ∆ = 0.6
and for κ0 equal to 2.2 and 3.6. Only for the values of κ0 around 3.6 and larger will
the measured hN3 (i)i differ significantly from the value at 2.2. For values larger than
3.8 (at ∆ = 0.6), we cross the phase transition line between the A and the C phase
and the universe will disintegrate into a number of small components distributed
along the time axis (as described in detail above), and one can no longer fit the
distribution hN3 (i)i to the formula (220).
Fig. 28 shows the average shape hN3 (i)i for κ0 = 2.2 and ∆ equal to 0.2 and 0.6.
Here the value ∆ = 0.2 is close to the phase transition where the extended universe
will flatten out to a universe with a time extension of a few lattice spacings only.
Later we will show that while s0 is almost unchanged, the constant k1 in (232),
which governs the quantum fluctuations around the mean value hN3 (i)i, is more
sensitive to a change of the bare coupling constants, in particular in the case where
we change κ0 (while leaving ∆ fixed).
94

9

Constructive evidence for the effective action

After the first “observations” of the “blob” and measurements which showed that
its large-scale behaviour was four-dimensional it was realized that the data were well
described by the minisuperspace action (229) (or (230)) [85]. However, only after it
was understood how to fix the translational mode did we obtain high-quality data
which could provide us with a serious test of the prediction coming from the action
(229). While the functional form (220) for the three-volume fits the data perfectly
and the corresponding continuum effective action (229) reproduces the continuum
version (226) of (220), it is still of interest to check to what extent one can reconstruct
the discretized version (232) of the continuum action (229) from the data explicitly.
Stated differently, we would like to understand whether there are other effective
actions which reproduce the data equally well. As we will demonstrate by explicit
construction in this section, there is good evidence for the uniqueness of the action
(232).
We have measured two types of data, the three-volume N3 (i) at the discrete time
step i, and the three-volume correlator hN3 (i)N3 (j)i. Having created K statistically
(k)
independent configurations N3 (i) by Monte Carlo simulation allows us to construct
the average
1 X (k)
N̄3 (i) := hN3 (i)i ∼
N (i),
(239)
=
K k 3

where the superscript in (·)(k) denotes the result of the k’th configuration sampled,
as well as the covariance matrix
1 X (k)
(k)
C(i, j) ∼
(N3 (i) − N̄3 (i))(N3 (j) − N̄3 (j)).
(240)
=
K k
P
Since we have fixed the sum N
i=1 N3 (i) (recall that N denotes the fixed number of
time steps in a given simulation), the covariance matrix has a zero mode, namely,
(0)
the constant vector ei ,
X
√
(0)
(0)
(241)
C(i, j)ej = 0, ei = 1/ N ∀i.
j

A spectral decomposition of the symmetric covariance matrix gives
Ĉ =

N
−1
X
a=1

λa |e(a) ihe(a) |,

(242)

where we assume the N − 1 other eigenvalues of the covariance matrix Ĉij are
different from zero. We now define the “propagator” P̂ as the inverse of Ĉ on the
subspace orthogonal to the zero mode e(0) , that is,
P̂ =

N
−1
X

1 (a) (a)
|e ihe | = (Ĉ + Â)−1 − Â,
λ
a=1 a
95

Â = |e(0) ihe(0) |.

(243)

We now assume we have a discretized action which can be expanded around the
expectation value N̄3 (i) according to
Sdiscr [N̄ + n] = Sdiscr [N̄ ] +

1X
ni P̂ij nj + O(n3).
2 i,j

(244)

If the quadratic approximation describes the quantum fluctuations around the expectation value N̄ well, the inverse of P̂ will be a good approximation to the covariance matrix. Conversely, still assuming the quadratic approximation gives a good
description of the fluctuations, the P̂ constructed from the covariance matrix will
to a good approximation allow us to reconstruct the action via (244).
Simply by looking at the inverse P̂ of the measured covariance matrix, defined
as described above, we observe that it is to a very good approximation small and
constant except on the diagonal and the entries next to the diagonal. We can
then decompose it into a “kinetic” and a “potential” term. The kinetic part P̂ kin is
defined as the matrix with non-zero elements on the diagonal and in the neighbouring
entries, such that the sum of the elements in a row or a column is always zero,
P̂

kin

=

N
X

pi X̂ (i) ,

(245)

i=1

where the matrix X̂ (i) is given by
(i)

X̂jk = δij δik + δ(i+1)j δ(i+1)k − δ(i+1)j δik − δij δ(i+1)k .

(246)

Note that the range of P̂ kin lies by definition in the subspace orthogonal to the zero
mode. Similarly, we define the potential term as the projection of a diagonal matrix
D̂ on the subspace orthogonal to the zero mode
P̂

pot

= (Iˆ − Â)D̂(Iˆ − Â) =

N
X

ui Ŷ (i) .

(247)

i=1

The diagonal matrix D̂ and the matrices Ŷ (i) are defined by
D̂jk = uj δjk ,

(i)

Ŷjk = δij δik −

δij + δik
1
+ 2,
N
N

(248)

and Iˆ denotes the N × N unit matrix.
The matrix P̂ is obtained from the numerical data by inverting the covariance
matrix Ĉ after subtracting the zero mode, as described above. We can now try to

96

find the best values of the pi and ui by a least-χ2 fit26 to

2
tr P̂ − (P̂ kin + P̂ pot ) .
160k
120k
80k
40k
20k

8000

6000
N̄3 (i), 2kpi1

(249)

4000

2000

0
-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

40

i

Figure 29: The measured expectation values N̄3 (i) (thick lines), compared to the averages N̄3 (i)
reconstructed from the measured covariance matrix Ĉ (thin black lines), for κ0 = 2.2 and ∆ = 0.6,
(4,1)
at various fixed volumes N4 . The two-fold symmetry of the interpolated curves around the
central symmetry axis results from an explicit symmetrization of the collected data.

Let us look at the discretized minisuperspace action (232) which obviously has
served as an inspiration for the definitions of P̂ kin and P̂ pot. Expanding N3 (i) to
second order around N̄3 (i) one obtains the identifications
N̄3 (i) =

2k1
,
pi

U ′′ (N̄3 (i)) = ui ,

(250)

1/3

where U(N3 (i)) = k1 k̃2 N3 (i) denotes the potential term in (232). We use the fitted
coefficients pi to reconstruct N̄3 (i) and then compare these reconstructed values
26

A χ2 -fit of the form (249) gives the same weight to each three-volume N3 (i). One might argue
that more weight should be given to the larger N3 (i) in a configuration since we are interested in
the continuum physics and not in what happens in the stalk where N3 (i) is very small. We have
tried various χ2 -fits with reasonable weights associated with the three-volumes N3 (i). The kinetic
term, which is the dominant term, is insensitive to any (reasonable) weight associated with N3 (i).
The potential term, which will be analyzed below, is more sensitive to the choice of the weight.
However, the general power-law dependence reported below is again unaffected by this choice.

97

0.0025

0.002

ui

0.0015

0.001

0.0005

0
-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

40

i

Figure 30: Reconstructing the second derivative U ′′ (N̄3 (i)) from the coefficients ui , for κ0 = 2.2
(4,1)

and ∆ = 0.6 and N4

= 160.000. The “blob” is located at |i| ≤ 21.

with actually measured averages N̄3 (i). Similarly, we can use the measured ui ’s to
−5/3
reconstruct the second derivatives U ′′ (N̄3 (i)) and compare them to the form N̄3 (i)
coming from (232).
The reconstruction of N̄3 (i) is illustrated in Fig. 29 for a variety of four-volumes
N4 and compared with the measured expectation values N̄3 (i). One observes that
the reconstruction works very well and, most importantly, the coupling constant k1 ,
which in this way is determined independently for each four-volume N4 is really
independent of N4 in the range of N4 considered, as it should.
We will now try to extract the potential U ′′ (N̄3 (i)) from the information contained in the matrix P̂ pot . The determination of U ′′ (N̄3 (i)) is not an easy task as can
be understood from Fig. 30, which shows the measured coefficients ui extracted from
the matrix P̂ pot . We consider this figure somewhat remarkable. The interpolated
curve makes an abrupt jump by two orders of magnitude going from the extended
part of the universe (stretching over roughly 40 time steps) to the stalk. The occurrence of this jump is entirely dynamical, no distinction has ever been made by hand
between stalk and bulk.
There are at least two reasons for why it is difficult to determine the potential
numerically. Firstly, the results are “contaminated” by the presence of the stalk.
Since it is of cutoff size, its dynamics is dominated by fluctuations which likewise are
of cutoff size. They will take the form of short-time subdominant contributions in
the correlator matrix Ĉ. Unfortunately, when we invert Ĉ to obtain the propagator
98

P̂ , the same excitations will correspond to the largest eigenvalues and give a very
large contribution. Although the stalk contribution in the matrix Ĉ is located away
from the bulk-diagonal, it can be seen from the appearance of the 1/N 2 -term in
eqs. (247) and (248) that after the projection orthogonal to the zero mode the
contributions from the stalk will also affect the remainder of the geometry in the
form of fluctuations around a small constant value. In deriving Fig. 31 we have
subtracted this constant value as best possible. However, the fluctuations of the
stalk cannot be subtracted and only good statistics can eventually eliminate their
effect on the behaviour of the extended part of the quantum universe. The second
(and less serious) reason is that from a numerical point of view the potential term is
always subdominant to the kinetic term for the individual spacetime histories in the
path integral. For instance, consider the simple example of the harmonic oscillator.
Its discretized action reads


N
X
xi+1 − xi 2
2 2
∆t
S=
+ ω xi ,
(251)
∆t
i=1
from which we deduce that the ratio between the kinetic and potential terms will
be of order 1/∆t as ∆t tends to zero. This reflects the well-known fact that the
kinetic term will dominate and go to infinity in the limit as ∆t → 0, with a typical
path x(t) being nowhere differentiable, but closer to a random walk. The same
will be true when dealing with a more general action like (229) and its discretized
1/4
version (232), where ∆t scales like ∆t ∼ 1/N4 . Of course, a classical solution
will behave differently: there the kinetic term will be comparable to the potential
term. However, when extracting the potential term directly from the data, as we
are doing, one is confronted with this issue.
The range of the discrete three-volumes N3 (i) in the extended universe is from
several thousand down to five, the kinematically allowed minimum. However, the
behaviour for the very small values of N3 (i) near the edge of the extended universe
is likely to be mixed in with discretization effects, to be discussed shortly. In order
1/3
to test whether one really has a N3 (i)-term in the action one should therefore only
use values of N3 (i) somewhat larger than five. This has been done in Fig. 31, where
we have converted the coefficients ui from functions of the discrete time steps i
into functions of the background spatial three-volume N̄3 (i) using the identification
in (250) (the conversion factor can be read off the relevant curve in Fig. 29). It
should be emphasized that Fig. 31 is based on data from the extended part of the
spacetime only; the variation comes entirely from the central region between times
-20 and +20 in Fig. 30, which explains why it has been numerically demanding to
extract a good signal. The data presented in Fig. 31 were taken at a discrete volume
(4,1)
−5/3
1/3
N4
= 160.000, and fit well the form N3 , corresponding to a potential k̃2 N3 .
There is a very small residual constant term present in this fit, which presumably
is due to the projection onto the space orthogonal to the zero mode, as already
discussed earlier. In view of the fact that its value is quite close to the noise level
99

2e-05

Fit av−5/3
Monte Carlo, 160k

−ui

1.5e-05

1e-05

5e-06

0
1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

N̄3 (i)

Figure 31: The second derivative −U ′′ (N3 ) as measured for N4(4,1) = 160.000, κ0 = 2.2 and

∆ = 0.6.

with our present statistics, we have simply chosen to ignore it in the remaining
discussion.
Let us finally address the question of how small values of N3 (i) we can use without
(4,1)
encountering finite-size effects [96]. Let us consider a universe of size N4
= 160.000
as above. If we are well inside the bulk (more than 6 time steps away from the stalk)
we observe a nice Gaussian distribution Pi (N3 ), where N3 denotes the number of
tetrahedra associated to the time-slice at ti (see Fig. 26 in order to relate the time
index i to the position of the blob and the position of the stalk). It is peaked around
the average value hN3 (i)i, where the average value with high precision is given by
formula (220). A typical measured distribution and a Gaussian fit is shown in Fig.
32.
Inside the stalk the situation is very different and we observe pronounced finitesize effects. This is to be expected since we are basically at the cutoff scale. The
distribution of three-volumes splits into three separate families. Inside each family
the discrete three-volumes differ by 3, such that we have three sets of possible N3 values, {5, 8, 11, . . . }, {6, 9, 12, . . . } and {7, 10, 13, . . . }. When we start to move
from the stalk and into the bulk, some memory of this will remain for small N3 (i),
as shown in Fig. 33. The bulk distribution of Fig. 26 extends over approximately
42 lattice spacings in the time direction. For distances up to six lattice spacings
from the “boundary” between the stalk and bulk (on both sides) one can observe
phenomena like those shown in Fig. 33, which of course are most pronounced close
100

Probability distribution for the blob
0.002

Gaussian fit

Pi (N3 )

0.0015

0.001

0.0005

0
1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

2200

2400

2600

N3

Figure 32: Probability distribution Pi (N3 ) of three-volumes at fixed time ti well inside the blob
(i = 11).

to the boundary. The figure shows the distribution P17 (N3 ) of three-volume at five
time steps from the “boundary” between the stalk and the bulk (see Fig. 26 for
the position of bulk and stalk). For small N3 one observes the split into three
distributions, which for N3 > 100 merge into one. However, even then the picture is
quite different from the Gaussian distribution far away from the stalk, shown in Fig.
32. When we consider Pi (N3 ) for |i| < 16, the chance of finding a N3 sufficiently
small to observe the finite-size effects just mentioned is essentially zero. From Fig.
31 it is clear that the real test of the power law requires small N3 , but we cannot
use N3 < 100 for the reasons just stated. A fair way to state our result is that the
−5/3
data are consistent with a N3
law, as seen from Fig. 31. On the other hand, if
one performs a fit to determine the power 5/3, the error bars will be quite large.
−5/3
Apart from obtaining the correct power law N3
for the potential for a given
spacetime volume N4 , it is equally important that the coefficient in front of this term
be independent of N4 . This seems to be the case as is shown in Fig. 34, where we
have plotted the measured potentials in terms of reduced, dimensionless variables
which make the comparison between measurements for different N4 easier.
In summary, we conclude that the data allow us to reconstruct the action (232)
with good precision. Quantifying the short-distance artifacts for one quantity gives
us a good idea of the scale at which they occur for a given four-volume, but still
leaves us with the difficulty of disentangling them from genuine quantum-gravity
signatures in this and other observables. For example, the non-Gaussian character
101

Probability distribution for the transition region
0.02

Pi (N3 )

0.015

0.01

0.005

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

N3
Probability distribution for the transition region
0.02

Probability distribution

Pi (N3 )

0.015

0.01

0.005

0
0

100

200

300

400

500

N3

Figure 33: The probability distribution P (N3 ) from the transition region near the end of the
blob (i = 18). For small N3 the distribution splits into three families (top). For large N3 the
split disappears, but the distribution is highly asymmetric (bottom, no colour-coding for the three
families).

102

20

−u

15

Linear Fit
Monte Carlo, 160k
Monte Carlo, 80k
Monte Carlo, 40k

10

5

0
10

20

30

40

50

− 35

v

Figure 34: The dimensionless second derivative u = N45/4 U ′′ (N3 ) plotted against ν −5/3 , where
3/4

(4,1)

ν = N3 /N4 is the dimensionless spatial volume, for N4
= 40.000, 80.000 and 160.000, κ0 = 2.2
and ∆ = 0.6. One expects a universal straight line near the origin (i.e. for large volumes) if the
1/3
power law U (N3 ) ∝ N3 is correct.

of the distribution of fluctuations around the sphere (220) at small N3 (i) observed
above could indicate new short-distance physics, say, along the lines suggested in
the asymptotic safety scenario [97]. We presently do not know how to relate the
deviation from the four-sphere at a small scale factor described there to our explicit
small-N3 (i) “observations”, but it would clearly be interesting to do so.

9.1

Relation to Hořava-Lifshitz gravity (part II)

As described above our data in phase C fits well to (232), the discretized version
of the minisuperspace action (229). However, there is a residual ambiguity in the
interpretation of the time coordinate, as it appears in the identification (227), which
takes the form of an overall, finite scaling between time and spatial directions. As we
have emphasized a number of times, due to the entropic nature of the effective action,
there is no compelling reason to take the microscopic geometric length assignments
literally. We have chosen the time “coordinate” t such that we obtain a round foursphere. However, the shape of the universe clearly changes in terms of the number
of lattice spacings in time direction relative to those in the spatial directions when
we vary the bare coupling constants κ0 and ∆. Although this change is qualitatively
in agreement with the change of α̃ as a function of κ0 and ∆ (recall eqs. (72) and
103

(73) which define α̃ and ∆, as well as Fig. 2), there is no detailed quantitative
agreement, as we have already mentioned. Thus, rather than choosing time to
be consistent with an S 4 -geometry, an alternative interpretation at this stage is to
assume that the effective action is changing. Since the CDT set-up allows us to refer
to its distinguished time slicing, a deformation à la Hořava-Lifshitz suggests itself.
A corresponding effective Euclidean continuum action, including the measure, and
expressed in terms of standard metric variables could be of the form
Z

1
√ 
3
ij
2
(3)
SH =
d x dt N g (Kij K − λK ) + (−γR + 2Λ + V (gij ) , (252)
16πG

where Kij denotes the extrinsic curvature, gij the three-metric on the spatial slices,
R(3) the corresponding three-dimensional scalar curvature, N the lapse function,
and finally V a “potential” which in Hořava’s continuum formulation would contain
higher orders of spatial derivatives, potentially rendering SH renormalizable. In our
case we are not committed to any particular choice of potential V (gij ), since we are
not imposing renormalizability of the theory in any conventional sense. An effective
V (gij ) could be generated by entropy, i.e. by the measure, and may not relate to
any discussion of the theory being renormalizable. The kinetic term depending
on the extrinsic curvature is the most general such term which is at most second
order in time derivatives and consistent with spatial diffeomorphism invariance. The
parameter λ appears in the (generalized) DeWitt metric, which defines an ultralocal
metric on the classical space of all three-metrics.27 The parameter γ can be related
to a relative scaling between time and spatial directions. When λ = γ = 1 and
V = 0 we recover the standard (Euclidean) Einstein-Hilbert action.
Making a simple minisuperspace ansatz with compact spherical slices, which
assumes homogeneity and isotropy of the spatial three-metric gij , and fixing the
lapse to N = 1, the Euclidean action (252) becomes a function of the scale factor
a(t) (see also [99, 100, 101]), that is,
Z


2π 2
ȧ2
6
Smini =
dt a(t)3 3(1 − 3λ) 2 − γ 2 + 2Λ + Ṽ (a) .
(253)
16πG
a
a

The first three terms in the parentheses define the IR limit, while the potential term
Ṽ (a) contains inverse powers of the scale factor a coming from possible higher-order
spatial derivative terms.
Our reconstruction of the effective action from the computer data, as described
above, is compatible with the functional form of the minisuperspace action (253).
Importantly, we so far have not been able to determine the constant k̃2 in front of
27

The value of λ governs the signature of the generalized DeWitt metric
Gijkl
=
λ

1p
det g(g ik g jl + g il g jk − 2λg ij g kl ),
2

which is positive definite for λ < 1/3, indefinite for λ = 1/3 and negative definite for λ > 1/3. The
role of λ in three-dimensional CDT quantum gravity has been analyzed in detail in [98].

104

the potential term in (233) with any precision, which would enable us to fix the ratio
(1 − 3λ)/2γ appearing in (253). Also, as we have already discussed, it is presently
not possible to determine Ṽ (a), which could be important for small values of the
scale factor. Once we have developed a better computer algorithm which allows us
to approach the B-C phase transition line, testing such Hořava-Lifshitz scenarios
will hopefully become easier.

9.2

Some preliminary conclusions

Let us emphasize a remarkable aspect of our results. Our starting point was the
Regge action for CDT, as described in Sec. 2 above. However, the effective action we
have generated dynamically by performing the nonperturbative sum over histories
is only indirectly related to this “bare” action. Likewise, the coupling constant k1
which appears in front of the effective action, and which we view as related to the
gravitational coupling constant G by eq. (234), has no obvious direct relation to the
“bare” coupling κ0 appearing in the Regge action (73). Nevertheless the leading
terms in the effective action for the scale factor are precisely the ones presented in
(229) or, more generally, in the effective Hořava-type action (253). The fact that
a kinetic term with a second-order derivative appears as the leading term in an
effective action is perhaps less surprising, but that it has precisely the form (229)
or (253), including the term N3 (i)1/3 , is remarkable and very encouraging for the
entire CDT quantization program. Until now our results are compatible with the
Einstein-Hilbert action, but better data are required to discriminate between the
actions (229) and (253). In general, solutions to the more general action (253) will
be stretched spheres [102], which have conical singularities at the end points (in
our case the locations where the stalk starts). However, these singularities in the
curvature will not be visible in the observable V3 (t).

10

Fluctuations around de Sitter space

We have shown that the action (232) gives an excellent description of the measured
shape N̄3 (i) of the extended universe. Assuming that the three-volume fluctuations around N̄3 (i) are sufficiently small so that a quadratic approximation is valid,
we have also shown that we can use the measured fluctuations to reconstruct the
discretized version (232) of the minisuperspace action (229), where k1 and k̃2 are
independent of the total four-volume N4 used in the simulations. This certainly
provides strong evidence that both the minisuperspace description of the dynamical behaviour of the (expectation value of the) three-volume, and the semiclassical
quadratic truncation for the description of the quantum fluctuations in the threevolume are essentially correct.
In the following we will test in more detail how well the actions (229) and (232)
describe the data encoded in the covariance matrix Ĉ. The correlation function was
105

3

20k
40k
80k
160k

2.5

F(t, t)1/2

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-2

-1

0

1

2

t

Figure 35: Analyzing the quantum fluctuations of Fig. 26: diagonal entries F (t, t)1/2 of the
(4,1)

universal scaling function F from (255), for N4

= 20.000, 40.000, 80.000 and 160.000.

defined in the previous section by
CN4 (i, i′ ) = hδN3 (i)δN3 (i′ )i,

δN3 (i) ≡ N3 (i) − N̄3 (i),

(254)

where we have included an additional subscript N4 to emphasize that N4 is kept
constant in a given simulation. The first observation extracted from the Monte
Carlo simulations is that under a change in the four-volume CN4 (i, i′ ) scales as28


1/4
1/4
(255)
CN4 (i, i′ ) = N4 F i/N4 , i′ /N4 ,

where F is a universal scaling function. This is illustrated by Fig. 35 for the rescaled
1/2
version of the diagonal part CN4 (i, i), corresponding precisely to the quantum fluctuations h(δN3 (i))2 i1/2 of Fig. 26. While the height of the curve in Fig. 26 will
3/4
1/2
grow as N4 , the superimposed fluctuations will only grow as N4 . We conclude
that for fixed bare coupling constants the relative fluctuations will go to zero in the
infinite-volume limit .
√
From the way the factor N4 appears as an overall scale in eq. (233) it is clear
that to the extent a quadratic expansion around the effective background geometry
28

We stress again that the form (255) is only valid in that part of the universe whose spatial
extension is considerably larger than the minimal S 3 constructed from five tetrahedra. (The spatial
volume of the stalk typically fluctuates between five and fifteen tetrahedra.)

106

is valid one will have a scaling
3/2

hδN3 (i)δN3 (i′ )i = N4 hδn3 (ti )δn3 (ti′ )i = N4 F (ti , ti′ ),

(256)

1/4

where ti = i/N4 . This implies that (255) provides additional evidence for the
validity of the quadratic approximation and the fact that our choice of action (232),
with k1 independent of N4 , is indeed consistent.
To demonstrate in detail that the full function F (t, t′ ) and not only its diagonal
part is described by the effective actions (229), (232), let us for convenience adopt a
continuum language and compute its expected behaviour. Expanding (229) around
the classical solution according to V3 (t) = V3cl (t) + x(t), the quadratic fluctuations
are given by
Z
RR
1
′
′
′
′
hx(t)x(t )i =
Dx(s) x(t)x(t′ ) e− 2 dsds x(s)M (s,s )x(s )
= M −1 (t, t′ ),

(257)

where Dx(s) is the normalized measure and the quadratic form M(t, t′ ) is determined
by expanding the effective action S to second order in x(t),
Z
1 B
cl
dt x(t)Ĥx(t).
(258)
S(V3 ) = S(V3 ) +
18πG V4
In expression (258), Ĥ denotes the Hermitian operator
d
1
d
4
− 2
,
(259)
3
dt cos (t/B) dt B cos5 (t/B)
R √
which must be diagonalized under the constraint that dt gtt x(t) = 0, since V4 is
kept constant.
Let e(n) (t) be the eigenfunctions of the quadratic form given by (258) with the
volume constraint enforced29 , ordered according to increasing eigenvalues λn . As we
will discuss shortly, the lowest eigenvalue is λ1 = 0, associated with translational
invariance in time direction, and should be left out when we invert M(t, t′ ), because
we precisely fix the centre of volume when making our measurements. Its dynamics
is therefore not accounted for in the correlator C(t, t′ ).
If this cosmological continuum model were to give the correct description of the
computer-generated universe, the matrix
Ĥ = −

M −1 (t, t′ ) =

∞
X
e(n) (t)e(n) (t′ )
n=2

λn

.

(260)

29
One simple way to find the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions approximately, including the constraint, is to discretize the differential operator, imposing that the (discretized) eigenfunctions
R
2
vanish at the boundaries t = ±Bπ/2 and finally adding the constraint as a term ξ
dt x(t) to
the action, where the coefficient ξ is taken large. The differential operator then becomes an ordinary matrix whose eigenvalues and eigenvectors can be found numerically. Stability with respect
to subdivision and choice of ξ is easily checked.

107

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1
e(4) (t)

e(2) (t)

0.4

0.1

0

0

-0.1

-0.1

-0.2

-0.2

-0.3
-20

-10

0

10

20

-20

t

-10

0

10

20

t

Figure 36: Comparing the two highest even eigenvectors of the covariance matrix C(t, t′ ) measured directly (green curves) with the two lowest even eigenvectors of M −1 (t, t′ ), calculated semiclassically (blue curves).

should be proportional to the measured correlator C(t, t′ ). Fig. 36 shows the eigenfunctions e(2) (t) and e(4)R(t) (with two and four zeros respectively), calculated from
√
Ĥ with the constraint dt gtt x(t) = 0 imposed. Simultaneously we show the
corresponding eigenfunctions calculated from the data, i.e. from the matrix C(t, t′ ),
which correspond to the (normalizable) eigenfunctions with the highest and thirdhighest eigenvalues. The agreement is very good, in particular when taking into
consideration that no parameter has been adjusted in the action (we simply take
1/4
B = s0 N4 ∆t in (226) and (258), which for N4 = 362.000 gives B = 14.47at , where
at denotes the time distance between successive slices).
The reader may wonder why the first eigenfunction exhibited has two zeros.
As one would expect, the ground state eigenfunction e(0) (t) of the Hamiltonian
(259), corresponding
but does not satisfy the
R to√the lowest eigenvalue, has no zeros,
(1)
volume constraint dt gtt x(t) = 0. The eigenfunction e (t) of Ĥ with next-lowest
eigenvalue has one zero and is given by the simple analytic function
t
t
4
dV cl (t)
e(1) (t) = √
sin
cos2
= c−1 3
,
(261)
B
B
dt
πB
where c is a constant. One realizes immediately that e(1) is the translational zero
mode of the classical solution V3cl (t) (∝ cos3 t/B). Since the action is invariant under
time translations we have
S(V3cl (t + ∆t)) = S(V3cl (t)),

(262)

and since V3cl (t) is a solution to the classical equations of motion we find to second
order (using the definition (261))
Z
c2 (∆t)2 B
cl
cl
dt e(1) (t)Ĥe(1) (t),
(263)
S(V3 (t + ∆t)) = S(V3 (t)) +
18πG V4
108

consistent with e(1) (t) having eigenvalue zero.
It is clear from Fig. 36 that some of the eigenfunctions of Ĥ (with the volume
constraint imposed) agree very well with the measured eigenfunctions. All even
eigenfunctions (those symmetric with respect to reflection about the symmetry axis
located at the centre of volume) turn out to agree very well. The odd eigenfunctions
of Ĥ agree less well with the eigenfunctions calculated from the measured C(t, t′ ).
The reason seems to be that we have not managed to eliminate the motion of the
centre of volume completely from our measurements. As already mentioned above,
there is an inherent ambiguity in fixing the centre of volume, which turns out to
be sufficient to reintroduce the zero mode in the data. Suppose we had by mistake
misplaced the centre of volume by a small distance ∆t. This would introduce a
modification
dV cl (t)
∆V3 = 3
∆t
(264)
dt
proportional to the zero mode of the potential V3cl (t). It follows that the zero mode
can re-enter whenever we have an ambiguity in the position of the centre of volume.
In fact, we have found that the first odd eigenfunction extracted from the data
can be perfectly described by a linear combination of e(1) (t) and e(3) (t). It may be
surprising at first that an ambiguity of one lattice spacing can introduce a significant
mixing. However, if we translate ∆V3 from eq. (264) to “discretized” dimensionless
√
3/4
1/4
units using V3 (i) ∼ N4 cos(i/N4 ), we find that ∆V3 ∼ N4 , which because of
h(δN3 (i))2 i ∼ N4 is of the same order of magnitude as the fluctuations themselves.
In our case, this apparently does affect the odd eigenfunctions.

11

The size of the universe

Let us now return to equation (234),
p
a2 C̃4 s̃20
√ ,
G=
k1 3 6

(265)

which relates the parameter k1 extracted from the Monte Carlo simulations to Newton’s constant in units of the cutoff a, G/a2 . For the bare coupling constants
(κ0 , ∆) = (2.2, 0.6) we have high-statistics measurements for N4 ranging from 45.500
(4,1)
to 362.000 four-simplices (equivalently, N4
ranging from 20.000 to 160.000 foursimplices). The choice of ∆ determines the asymmetry parameter α̃, and the choice
(3,2)
(4,1)
of (κ0 , ∆) determines the ratio ξ between N4
and N4 . This in turn determines
the “effective” four-volume C̃4 of an average four-simplex, which also appears in
(265). The number s̃0 in (265) is determined directly from the time extension Tuniv
of the extended universe according to

1/4
(4,1)
Tuniv = π s̃0 N4
.
109

(266)

Finally, from our measurements we have determined k1 = 0.038. Taking everything
√
together according to (265), we obtain G ≈ 0.23a2 , or ℓP l ≈ 0.48a, where ℓP l = G
is the Planck length.
From the identification of the volume of the four-sphere, V4 = 8π 2 r 4 /3 =
(4,1)
C̃4 N4 a4 , we obtain that r = 3.1a. In other words, the linear size πR of the
quantum de Sitter universes studied here lies in the range of 12-21 Planck lengths
for N4 in the range mentioned above and for the bare coupling constants chosen as
(κ0 , ∆) = (2.2, 0.6).
Our dynamically generated universes are therefore not very big, and the quantum
fluctuations around their average shape are large as is apparent from Fig. 26. It is
rather surprising that the semiclassical minisuperspace formulation is applicable
for universes of such a small size, a fact that should be welcome news to anyone
performing semiclassical calculations to describe the behaviour of the early universe.
However, in a certain sense our lattices are still coarse compared to the Planck scale
ℓP l because the Planck length is roughly half a lattice spacing. If we are after a theory
of quantum gravity valid on all scales, we are in particular interested in uncovering
phenomena associated with Planck-scale physics. In order to collect data free from
unphysical short-distance lattice artifacts at this scale, we would ideally like to work
with a lattice spacing much smaller than the Planck length, while still being able to
set by hand the physical volume of the universe studied on the computer.
The way to achieve this, under the assumption that the coupling constant G
of formula (265) is indeed a true measure of the gravitational coupling constant, is
as follows. We are free to vary the discrete four-volume N4 and the bare coupling
constants (κ0 , ∆) of the Regge action. Assuming for the moment that the semiclassical minisuperspace action is valid, the effective coupling constant k1 in front of it
will be a function of the bare coupling constants (κ0 , ∆), and can in principle be
determined as described above for the case (κ0 , ∆) = (2.2, 0.6). If we adjusted the
bare coupling constants such that in the limit as N4 → ∞ both
V4 ∼ N4 a4

and G ∼ a2 /k1(κ0 , ∆)
(267)
√
remained constant (i.e. k1 (κ0 , ∆) ∼ 1/ N4 ), we would eventually reach a region
where the lattice spacing a was significantly smaller than the Planck length, in which
event the lattice could be used to approximate spacetime structures of Planckian
size and we could initiate a genuine study of the sub-Planckian regime. Since we
have no control over the effective coupling constant k1 , the first obvious question
which arises is whether we can at all adjust the bare coupling constants in such a
way that at large scales we still see a four-dimensional universe, with k1 going to
zero at the same time. The answer seems to be in the affirmative, as we will now
go on to explain.
Fig. 37 shows the results of extracting k1 for a range of bare coupling constants
for which we still observe an extended universe. In the top figure ∆ = 0.6 is kept
constant while κ0 is varied. For κ0 sufficiently large we eventually reach a point where
the A-C transition takes place (the point in the square in the bottom right-hand
110

0.045

0.06

0.05
0.04
k1

k1

0.04

0.03
0.035
0.02

0.01

0.03
0

1

2

3

0

4

κ0

1

2

3

4

5

∆0

Figure 37: The measured effective coupling constant k1 as function of the bare κ0 (left, ∆ = 0.6
fixed) and the asymmetry ∆ (right, κ0 = 2.2 fixed). The marked point near the middle of the data
points sampled is the point (κ0 , ∆) = (2.2, 0.6) where most measurements in the remainder of the
paper were taken. The other marked points are those closest to the two phase transitions lines, to
the A-C phase transition line on the left figure, and the B-C phase transition line on right figure.
corner is the measurement closest to the transition we have looked at). For even
larger values of κ0 , beyond this transition, the universe disintegrates into a number
of small universes, in a CDT-analogue of the branched-polymer phase of Euclidean
quantum gravity, as described above. The plot shows that the effective coupling
constant k1 becomes smaller and possibly goes to zero as the phase transition point
is approached, although our current data do not yet allow us to conclude that k1
does indeed vanish at the transition point.
Conversely, the bottom figure of Fig. 37 shows the effect of varying ∆, while
keeping κ0 = 2.2 fixed. As ∆ is decreased from 0.6, we eventually hit the BC phase transition, separating the physical phase of extended universes from the
CDT-equivalent of the crumpled phase of Euclidean quantum gravity, where the
entire universe will be concentrated within a few time steps. Strictly speaking we
are not able to go much closer than to ∆ = 0.3, as already explained. It seems that
the effective coupling constant k1 starts to decrease in value when ∆ is decreasing
from 0.6, but since we cannot get very close to the phase boundary, we cannot in
any convincing way say that k1 → 0 along the B-C phase boundary.
To extract the coupling constant G from (265) we not only have to take into
account the change in k1 , but also that in s̃0 (the width of the distribution N3 (i))
and in the effective four-volume C̃4 as a function of the bare coupling constants.
Combining these changes, we arrive at a slightly different picture. Approaching the
B-C boundary the gravitational coupling constant G does not vary much, despite
the fact that 1/k1 increases. This is a consequence of s̃0 decreasing considerably,
as can be seen from Fig. 28. On the other hand, when we approach the A-C the
effective gravitational coupling constant G increases, more or less like 1/k1 , where
the behaviour of k1 is shown in Fig. 37 (left). This implies that the Planck length
111

√
ℓP l = G increases from approximately 0.48a to 0.83a when κ0 changes from 2.2 to
3.6. On the basis of these arguments it seems that we have to go very close to the
phase boundaries in order to penetrate into the sub-Planckian regime.
One interesting issue under investigation is whether and to what extent the
simple minisuperspace description remains valid as we go to shorter scales. This
raises the interesting possibility of being able to test explicitly the scaling violations
of G predicted by renormalization group methods in the context of asymptotic safety
[5]. We will discuss this in detail in Sec. 13.

12

The fractal dimensions

12.1

The spectral dimension

One way to obtain information about the geometry of our quantum universe is by
studying a diffusion process on the underlying geometric ensemble. We will use
this technique to determine the so-called spectral dimension DS of the ensemble of
geometries.
As a start let us discuss briefly diffusion on a d-dimensional manifold with a
fixed, smooth Riemannian metric gab (ξ). The diffusion equation has the form
∂
Kg (ξ, ξ0; σ) = ∆g Kg (ξ, ξ0; σ),
∂σ

(268)

where σ is a fictitious diffusion time, ∆g the Laplace operator of the metric gab (ξ)
and Kg (ξ, ξ0; σ) the probability density of diffusion from ξ0 to ξ in diffusion time σ.
We will consider diffusion processes which initially are peaked at some point ξ0 ,
Kg (ξ, ξ0; σ = 0) = p

1
det g(ξ)

δ d (ξ − ξ0 ).

(269)

For the special case of a flat Euclidean metric, we have
2

e−dg (ξ,ξ0 )/4σ
Kg (ξ, ξ0; σ) =
,
(4πσ)d/2

gab (ξ) = δab .

(270)

For general curved spaces Kg has the well-known asymptotic expansion
∞

2

e−dg (ξ,ξ0 )/4σ X
ar (ξ, ξ0) σ r
Kg (ξ, ξ0; σ) ∼
σ d/2
r=0

(271)

for small σ, where dg (ξ, ξ0) denotes the geodesic distance between ξ and ξ0 . Note
the appearance of the power σ −d/2 in this relation, reflecting the dimension d of the
manifold, just like in the formula (270) for flat space. This happens because small
values of σ correspond to short distances and for any given smooth metric short
distances imply approximate flatness.
112

A quantity that is easier to measure in numerical simulations is the average
return probability Pg (σ), which possesses an analogous expansion for small σ,
1
Pg (σ) ≡
V

Z

∞
p
1 X
d ξ det g(ξ) Kg (ξ, ξ; σ) ∼ d/2
Ar σ r ,
σ
r=0
d

(272)

p
R
where V is the spacetime volume V = dd ξ det g(ξ) and the expansion coefficients
Ar are given by
Z
p
1
Ar =
dd ξ det g(ξ) ar (ξ, ξ).
(273)
V
For an infinite flat space, we have Pg (σ) = 1/(4πσ)d/2 and thus can extract the
dimension d by taking the logarithmic derivative,
−2

d log Pg (σ)
= d,
d log σ

(274)

independent of σ. For non-flat spaces and/or finite volume V , one can still use eq.
(274) to extract the dimension, but there will be corrections for sufficiently large
σ. For finite volume in particular, Pg (σ) goes to 1/V for σ ≫ V 2/d since the zero
mode of the Laplacian −∆g will dominate the diffusion in this region. For a given
diffusion time σ the behaviour of Pg (σ) is determined by eigenvalues λn of −∆g with
λn ≤ 1/σ, and the contribution from higher eigenvalues is exponentially suppressed.
Like in√the flat case, where diffusion over a time σ probes the geometry at a linear
scale σ, large σ corresponds to large distances away from the origin ξ0 of the
diffusion process, and small σ to short distances.
The construction above can be illustrated by the simplest example of diffusion
in one dimension. The solution to the diffusion equation on the real axis, starting
at the origin, is
2
e−ξ /4σ
2
K(ξ, σ) = √
, K(k, σ) = e−k σ ,
(275)
4πσ
where K(k, σ) denotes the Fourier transform of K(ξ, σ). The eigenvalues of the
Laplace operator are of course just given by k 2 . In order to illustrate the finitevolume effect, let us compactify the real line to a circle of length L. The return
probability is now given by
∞
∞
X
1
1 X −kn2 σ
2 2
e
=√
PL (σ) =
e−L m /4σ ,
L n=−∞
4πσ m=−∞

kn =

2πn
,
L

(276)

where in the second step we have performed a Poisson resummation to highlight
the σ −1/2 -dependence for small σ. In line with the discussion above, the associated
spectral dimension DS (σ) is constant (and equal to one) up to σ-values of the order
L2 /4π 2 , and then goes to zero monotonically.

113

In applying this set-up to four-dimensional quantum gravity in a path integral
formulation, we are interested in measuring the expectation value of the return probability Pg (σ). Since Pg (σ) defined in (272) is invariant under reparametrizations, it
makes sense to take its quantum average over all geometries of a given spacetime
volume V4 ,

Z
Z
1
−SE (gab )
4 √
PV4 (σ) =
(277)
D[gab ] e
δ
d x g − V4 Pg (σ),
Z(V4 )

in accordance with the definition of expectation values (209). Since the small-σ
behaviour of Pg (σ) is the same for each smooth geometry, it might seem obvious that
the same is true for their integral PV4 (σ), but this need not be so. Firstly, the scale
σ in (277) is held fixed, independent of the geometry gab , while the expansion (272)
contains reference to higher powers of the curvature of gab . Secondly, one should keep
in mind that a typical geometry which contributes to the path integral – although
continuous – is unlikely to be smooth. This does not invalidate our treatment,
since diffusion processes can be meaningfully defined on much more general objects
than smooth manifolds. For example, the return probability for diffusion on fractal
structures is well studied in statistical physics and takes the form
 σ 
−DS /2
,
(278)
PN (σ) = σ
F
N 2/DS
where N is the “volume” associated with the fractal structure and DS the so-called
spectral dimension, which is not necessarily an integer. An example of fractal structures are branched polymers which generically have DS = 4/3 [103, 104]. Extensive numerical simulations [105, 106] have shown that in two-dimensional quantum
gravity the only effect of integrating over geometries is to replace the asymptotic
expansion (272), which contains reference to powers of the curvature related to a
specific metric, by the simpler form (278).
Our next task is to define diffusion on the class of metric spaces under consideration, the piecewise linear structures defined by the causal triangulations T . At
this point we will cheat a little. When translating eq. (268) into a form suitable
for our piecewise linear geometries we will assume α̃ = 1, although this is strictly
speaking not the case. The motivation is that the expression for α̃ 6= 1 is more
complicated, and that following the diffusion on large triangulations consumes a lot
of computer time. Since we are presently only trying to determine DS which is a reasonably universal exponent, we expect it to be independent of the exact discretized
implementation of the Laplacian ∆g on the piecewise linear geometry.
We start from an initial probability distribution
KT (i, i0 ; σ = 0) = δi,i0 ,

(279)

which vanishes everywhere except at a randomly chosen (4,1)-simplex i0 , and define
the diffusion process by the evolution rule
1X
KT (j, i0 ; σ + 1) =
KT (k, i0 ; σ).
(280)
5 k→j
114

These equations are the simplicial analogues of (269) and (268), with the triangulation (together with its Euclideanized edge-length assignments) playing the role of
gab , and k → j denoting the five nearest neighbours of the four-simplex j. Clearly
(280) is only the discretized Laplacian if the length assignments of all links is 1 (in
lattice units), i.e. α̃ = 1, as just discussed. In this process, the total probability
X
KT (j, i0 ; σ) = 1
(281)
j

is conserved. The return probability to a simplex i0 is then defined as PT (i0 ; σ) =
KT (i0 , i0 ; σ) and the quantum average as
1 X −SE (TN ) 1 X
4
e
KTN4 (i0 , i0 ; σ),
(282)
PN4 (σ) =
Z(N4 ) T
N4 i ∈T
0

N4

N4

where TN4 denotes a triangulation with N4 four-simplices, and SE (TN4 ) and Z(N4 )
are the obvious simplicial analogues of the continuum quantities at fixed fourvolume. Assuming that the return probability behaves according to (278), with
N = N4 , we can extract the value of the fractal dimension DS by measuring the
logarithmic derivative as in (274) above, as long as the diffusion time is not much
2/D
larger than N4 S ,
DS (σ) = −2

d log PN4 (σ)
+ finite-size corrections.
d log σ

(283)

From the experience with numerical simulations of two-dimensional Euclidean
quantum gravity in terms of dynamical triangulations [107, 105, 106], we expect
some irregularities in the behaviour of the return probability for the smallest σ,
i.e. close to the cutoff scale. Typically, the behaviour of PN (σ) for odd and even
diffusion steps σ will be quite different for small σ and merge only for σ ≈ 20 − 30.
After the merger, the curve enters a long and stable regime where the right-hand
side of (283) is independent of σ, before finite-size effects start to dominate which
force it to go to zero.
The origin of the odd-even asymmetry can again be illustrated by the simple
case of diffusion on a circle, whose solution is the discretized version of the solution
(276). In this case the asymmetry of the return probability between odd and even
time steps is extreme: if we use the one-dimensional version of the simple evolution
equation (280), we obtain

0
for σ odd,





(284)
PL (σ) =
1
σ


for σ even,
 σ
σ/2
2

as long as σ < L/2, where L is the discrete volume of the circle (i.e. the number
of its edges). It is of course possible to eliminate this asymmetry by using an “improved” discretized diffusion equation, but in the case of higher-dimensional random
115

4
3.75
3.5

DS

3.25
3
2.75
2.5

20k
40k
80k
160k

2.25
2
100

200

300

400

σ

Figure 38: The spectral dimension DS (σ) of causal dynamical triangulations as a function of the
diffusion time σ, which is a direct measure of the distance scale probed. The measurements were
(4,1)
taken at volumes N4
= 20k (bottom curve), 40k and 80k (top curve), and for κ0 = 2.2, ∆ = 0.6
and N = 80.

geometries like those used in four-dimensional causal dynamical triangulations this
is not really necessary.
The results of measuring the spacetime spectral dimension DS were first reported
(4,1)
in [108] and discussed in detail in [78]. We work with system sizes of up to N4 =
80k with κ0 = 2.2, ∆ = 0.6 and N = 80. Since we are interested in the bulk properties
of quantum spacetime and since the volume is not distributed evenly in the time
direction (cf. Fig. 20), we always start the diffusion process from a four-simplex
adjacent to the slice of maximal three-volume. When this is done the variations in
the curve DS (σ) for different generic choices of triangulation T and starting simplices
i0 are small. The data curves presented in Fig. 38 were obtained by averaging over
400 different diffusion processes performed on independent configurations. We have
omitted error bars from Fig. 38 to illustrate how the curves converge to a shape that
represents DS (σ) in the infinite-volume limit, and which is given by the envelope
(4,1)
of the data curves for finite volume. For the two lower volumes, N4 = 20k and
(4,1)
N4 = 40k, there still are clear finite-volume effects for large diffusion times σ.
(4,1)
By contrast, the top curve – corresponding to the maximal volume N4 = 80k
– continues to rise for increasing σ, which makes it plausible that we can ignore any
finite-size effects and that it is a good representative of the infinite-volume limit in

116

the σ-range considered.30 We will therefore concentrate on analyzing the shape of
this curve, which is presented separately in Fig. 39, now with error bars included.
(More precisely, the two outer curves represent the envelopes to the tops and bottoms
of the error bars.) The error grows linearly with σ, due to the occurrence of the
log σ in (283).
The remarkable feature of the curve DS (σ) is its slow approach to the asymptotic
value of DS (σ) for large σ. This type of behaviour has never been observed previously
in systems of random geometry (see e.g. [107, 105, 109]), and again underlines that
causal dynamical triangulations in four dimensions behave qualitatively differently,
and that the quantum geometry produced is in general richer. The new phenomenon
we observe here is a scale dependence of the spectral dimension, which has emerged
dynamically. This is to be contrasted with fractal structures which show a selfsimilar behaviour at all scales.
A best three-parameter fit which asymptotically approaches a constant is of the
form
b
119
DS (σ) = a −
= 4.02 −
.
(285)
σ+c
54 + σ
The constants a, b and c have been determined by using the full data range σ ∈
[40, 400] and the curve shape agrees well with the measurements, as can be seen
from Fig. 39. Integrating (285) we obtain
P (σ) ∼

1
σ a/2 (1 + c/σ)b/2c

from which we deduce the limiting cases

 σ −a/2
P (σ) ∼
 −(a−b/c)/2
σ

,

(286)

for large σ,
(287)
for small σ.

We conclude that the quantum geometry generated by causal dynamical triangulations has a scale-dependent spectral dimension which increases continuously from
a−b/c to a with increasing distance. Substituting the values for a, b and c obtained
from the fit (285), and taking into account their variation as we vary the σ-range
[σmin , σmax ] and use different weightings for the errors, we obtained the asymptotic
values [108, 78]
DS (σ = ∞) = 4.02 ± 0.1
(288)
for the “long-distance spectral dimension” and
DS (σ = 0) = 1.80 ± 0.25
30

(289)

In both Figs. 38 and 39 we have only plotted the region where the curves for odd and even σ
coincide, in order to exclude short-distance
√ lattice artifacts. The two curves merge at about σ = 40.
Since the diffusion distance grows as σ, a return diffusion time of 40 corresponds to just a few
steps away from the initial four-simplex.

117

4

Measurement
Fit

3.8

DS

3.6
3.4
3.2
3
2.8
0

100

200

300

400

500

σ

Figure 39: The spectral dimension DS of the universe as function of the diffusion time σ,
measured for κ0 = 2.2, ∆ = 0.6 and N = 80, and a spacetime volume N4 = 181k. The averaged
measurements lie along the central curve, together with a superimposed best fit DS (σ) = 4.02−
119/(54+σ). The two outer curves represent error bars.

for the “short-distance spectral dimension”.
A dynamically generated scale-dependent dimension with this behaviour signals
the existence of an effective ultraviolet cutoff for theories of gravity, brought about
by the (highly nonperturbative) behaviour of the quantum-geometric degrees of
freedom on the very smallest scale. Of course, one should not lose sight of the fact
that this is a numerical result, based on data and fits. It would be desirable to have
a model which exhibits a scale-dependent spectral dimension and can be understood
analytically, in order to illuminate the mechanism at work in CDT quantum gravity.
An example of such a model has been constructed recently [110].
After we observed the dynamical reduction (to ∼ 2) of the spectral dimension at
short distances, there has been a considerable amount of theoretical work showing
that DS = 2 in the UV regime comes about naturally also in the asymptotic safety
scenario [97], in Hořava-Lifshitz gravity [111] and even more generally [112]. Comparative studies of the behaviour of the spectral dimension away from the asymptotic
UV and IR regimes have been conducted in [113]. In the next section we will discuss
how one can imagine making contact with these other theories of quantum gravity
and also why the UV spectral dimension in these theories is equal to 2.
Finally, it should be mentioned that the observed short-distance value DS (σ =
0) = 1.80 ± 0.25 agrees within measuring accuracy with old measurements of the
118

spectral dimension in Euclidean DT quantum gravity in the so-called “crinkled”
phase [114]. This phase was “discovered” when a number of gauge fields were coupled to Euclidean four-dimensional gravity using the formalism of dynamical triangulations. The effect of the gauge fields is to change the typical geometry from
branched-polymer type with Hausdorff dimension 2 and spectral dimension 4/3 to a
different type of geometry with Hausdorff dimension close to 4 and a spectral dimension 1.7 ± 0.2. It was shown subsequently that one can obtain the same geometric
results by forgetting Q
about the U(1)-gauge fields altogether and instead assigning
an additional weight t∈T o(t)β to each triangulation T , where t denotes a triangle
in T and o(t) is the order of t, i.e. the number of four-simplices to which t belongs. For suitable values of β one could reproduce most of the geometric features
resulting from the addition of U(1)-gauge fields [115]. Since the Regge curvature
is located at the triangles and – when using identical building blocks like in DT –
only depends on the order of t, it was natural to view the weight as an effective
higher-order curvature term in the action, resulting from integrating out the gauge
fields. However, this otherwise appealing interpretation was somewhat undermined
by the observation that precisely this weight factor arises when changing the assignment of the U(1)-gauge field from the links to the dual links [116], suggesting that
one is dealing merely with discretization ambiguities, which are unlikely to leave an
imprint in the continuum limit. The conclusion at the time was that the crinkled
phase, just like the other phases in pure, four-dimensional Euclidean DT, is a lattice
artifact. Nevertheless, the crinkled phase was reconsidered recently in [117], where
the spectral dimension was measured again and DS (σ = 0) found to be in agreement
with the old results obtained in [114, 115]. At the same time it was noticed that
it displays a scale-dependence similar to that observed in four-dimensional CDT. If
other physically desirable features can be shown to be present in this phase, it may
mean that there is a truly isotropic model which belongs to the same universality
class as CDT. This is an interesting suggestion which deserves further study.
In closing, let us remark that – apart from allowing us to define and measure the
spectral dimension – the diffusion equation is an immensely useful tool for studying
the geometry of quantum space. A lot of interesting work has been reported, both
in three- [102] and four-dimensional CDT [86], related to the more detailed shape
of the computer-generated quantum universes.

12.2

The Hausdorff dimension

The diffusion equation probes certain aspects of the underlying spacetime, which
– important for our purposes – extend into the quantum regime, as we have seen
above. For smooth manifolds the spectral dimension defined from the diffusion
equation agrees with the ordinary, topological dimension of the manifold and its
so-called Hausdorff dimension. For fractal geometries, like those encountered in
the path integral, the Hausdorff dimension can differ from the spectral dimension,
while there may be no “ordinary” dimension. Here we will define and measure the
119

Hausdorff dimension both for a spatial slice and for the entire spacetime between two
spatial slices. Let us start with a spatial slice of a given configuration of spacetime
as it appears in the path integral. Due to the presence of a time foliation we have
well-defined spatial slices with the topology of three-spheres at discretized times tn ,
constructed by gluing together tetrahedra.
Our algorithm for determining the Hausdorff dimension dh of the spatial slices
is as follows. From a given time slice of discrete volume N3 , we randomly pick a
tetrahedron i0 . From i0 , we move out by one step and obtain n(1) tetrahedra at
distance 1 from i0 (that is, its nearest neighbours). Moving out by a further step,
there will be n(2) tetrahedra at distance 2, and so on until all tetrahedra have been
visited. The numbers n(r) recorded for each (discrete) distance r sum up to
rX
max

n(r) = N3 .

(290)

r=0

Finally, we measure the average linear extension
hri =

1 X
rn(r)
N3 r

(291)

of the spatial slice. For a slice of volume N3 , this process is repeated N3 /50 + 1
times with different randomly chosen initial tetrahedra. The expectation value hri
is then averaged over these measurements. In this way, we obtain for every slice a
data pair
{hhrii, N3},
(292)
representing one “bare” measurement.
This process is performed for all spatial slices of the given geometry. We have
typically done this for about 1000 different spacetime geometries. The final results
are sorted by their hhrii-value (in practice a continuous variable) and averaged over
a sequence of 100 consecutive points. The data points are then displayed on a log-log
plot. In the presence of finite-size scaling, we expect them to follow a curve
hN3 i(r) ∝ hridh ,

(293)

defining a spatial Hausdorff dimension dh . Our results, which show universal behaviour and scaling, are presented in Fig. 40.
Another substructure of spacetime whose geometry can be investigated straightforwardly are what we shall call “thick” spatial slices, namely, the sandwiches of
geometry contained in between two adjacent spatial slices of integer times tn and
tn+1 , with topology I × S 3 . Such thick spatial slices are made up of four-simplices of
types (4,1) and (3,2) and their time-reversed counterparts (1,4) and (2,3). To determine the Hausdorff dimension dH of the thick slices, we pick a random four-simplex
from such a slice. We proceed then exactly as we did when measuring the Hausdorff
dimension dh of the spatial slices at integer-tn . Starting from the randomly chosen
120

4
3.5
loghN3i

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.4

0.6

1

0.8

1.2

1.4

loghri

Figure 40: Log-log plot of the average linear geodesic size hriN3 versus the three-volume N3 ,

measured for ∆ = 0.4 and κ0 = 2.2. The straight line corresponds to a Hausdorff dimension dh = 3.
Similar measurements for ∆ = 0.5 and 0.6 and κ0 = 2.2 yield virtually indistinguishable results.

initial four-simplex, we move out, one step at a time, to the nearest neighbours at
distance r, from the previous set of building blocks at distance r − 1, except that we
never allow the crossing of the time slices tn and tn+1 . At each step, we keep track
of the number n(r) of building blocks, whose sum is equal to the total slice volume
N,
rX
max
n(r) = N,
(294)
r=0

which enables us to compute the average linear size
hri =

1 X
rn(r)
N r

(295)

of the thick slice. For a given slice of volume N, this process is then repeated
N4 /100 + 1 times with randomly chosen initial building blocks. The average size
hri is again averaged over this set and the data pair {hhrii, N} stored. Using the
same procedure as described following formula (292) above, we extract the Hausdorff
dimension dH from the relation
N4 ∝ hridH .

(296)

The results are presented in Fig. 41 in the form of a log-log plot. The straight line
corresponds to dH = 4, and the best fitted value is dH = 4.01 ± 0.05. Measurements
were performed on spacetimes with total size Ñ4 =20, 40 and 80k, at κ0 = 2.2,
∆ = 0.6. – We conclude that the transition from a genuine constant-time slice to
121

4.5
4

loghN i

3.5
3

2.5
2
1.5
0.6

1

0.8

1.2

1.4

loghri

Figure 41: Log-log plot of the average linear geodesic size hriN versus the volume N of a thick

slice. The straight line corresponds to a Hausdorff dimension dH = 4.

a thick slice adds one extra dimension to the Hausdorff dimension – the thickened
slice already “feels” some aspects of the four-dimensionality of the full spacetime.
Note that this would not be true for a thick slice of a classical, regular lattice,
whose Hausdorff dimension would be the same as that of a “thin” slice. The likely
mechanism for the dimensional increase in the triangulations is the appearance of
“short-cuts” between two tetrahedral building blocks, say, once one moves slightly
away from a slice of integer-tn . Finally, it is also true that if we simply measure the
Hausdorff dimension without any restriction to stay within a “thick” spatial slice
we still obtain dH = 4.

13

Making contact with asymptotic safety

As we discussed earlier, it is technically challenging to get close to the B-C phase
transition line, which is needed if we want to achieve a higher resolution in the UV
regime, such that the lattice spacing is much smaller than the Planck length. Also,
we do not know yet whether in such a limit we have an isotropic scaling behaviour
in space and time, like in the asymptotic safety approach, or need to invoke a more
general, anisotropic scenario as outlined above. For the time being, let us assume
that the end point P0 of the B-C transition line in the phase diagram of Fig. 17
corresponds to an isotropic phase transition point. How can one make contact with
the gravitational renormalization group treatment? The standard way would be to
“measure” observables (by lattice Monte Carlo simulations), like a mass in QCD or
the string tension in Yang-Mills theory. For definiteness, let us consider the string
tension σ, which has mass dimension two. The measurements, for some choice g0 of
122

the bare coupling constant, will give us a number σ(g0 ). We now write
σ(g0 ) = σR a2 (g0 ),

(297)

where σR is the dimensionful, physical string tension and a(g0 ) describes the dependence of the lattice spacing a on the bare coupling constant g0 . Similarly, one can
try to measure the mass of the glueball, which on the lattice will be some number
m0 (g0 ). The relation analogous to (297) is
m0 (g0 ) = mR a(g0 ),

(298)

where mR is the physical glueball mass. Being able to write down relations like this
for all observables, where a(g0 ) is determined by the renormalization group equation
a

dg0
= −β(g0 ),
da

(299)

allows us to define a continuum theory at a fixed point g0∗ where β(g0) = 0, since
there we can take a(g0 ) → 0 when g0 → g0∗ . In the case of QCD or Yang-Mills
theory the fixed point is the Gaussian fixed point g0∗ = 0, but in the more general
setting of asymptotic safety it will be non-Gaussian.
Assume now that we have a fixed point for gravity. The gravitational coupling
constant is dimensionful, and we can write for the bare coupling constant
G(a) = a2 Ĝ(a),

a

dĜ
= −β(Ĝ),
da

β(Ĝ) = 2Ĝ − cĜ3 + · · · .

(300)

The IR fixed point Ĝ = 0 corresponds to G constant while the putative non-Gaussian
fixed point corresponds to Ĝ → Ĝ∗ , i.e. G(a) → Ĝ∗ a2 . In our case it is tempting to
identify our dimensionless constant k1 with 1/Ĝ, up to the constant of proportionality given in (234). Close to the UV fixed point we have
Ĝ(a) = Ĝ∗ − Kac̃ ,

k1 = k1∗ + Kac̃ ,

c̃ = −β ′ (Ĝ∗ ).

(301)

Usually one relates the lattice spacing near the fixed point to the bare coupling constants with the help of some correlation length ξ. Assume that ξ diverges according
to
c
(302)
ξ(g0) =
|g0 − g0∗ |ν

in the limit as we tune the bare coupling constant g0 → g0∗ . This correlation length
is associated with a field correlator and usually some physical mass mph (like the
glue-ball mass referred to in (298)) by means of
|n1 − n2 |
= mph (a|n1 − n2 |) = mph |x1 − x2 |,
ξ(g0)
123

(303)

where |n1 − n2 | is a discrete lattice distance and |x1 − x2 | a physical distance.
Requiring the physical quantities |x1 − x2 | and mph to remain constant as a → 0
then fixes a as a function of the bare coupling constant,
a=

1
|g0 − g0∗ |ν .
c mph

(304)

Eq. (304) is only valid close to the fixed point and should be compared to the
renormalization group equation (299), from which we deduce that ν = 1/|β ′ (g0∗)|.
In the gravitational case at hand we do not (yet) have observables which would
allow us to define meaningful correlation lengths. At any rate, it is by no means
a settled issue how to define such a concept in a theory where one integrates over
all geometries, and where the length is itself a function of geometry, as already
emphasized in the Introduction (see [15] for related discussions). Instead, we construct from our computer-generated “data” an effective action, where all degrees
of freedom, apart from the scale factor, have been integrated out. We impose the
constraint that the data are fitted to a universe of total lattice four-volume N4 . Measurements are performed at different, fixed values of N4 , all the while maintaining
the relation31
V4 = N4 a4 .
(305)
We then “remove the regulator” by investigating the limit N4 → ∞. In ordinary
lattice field theory, we have two options for changing N4 ; either we keep a fixed,
and therefore change V4 , or we keep V4 fixed and change a. Let us illustrate the
difference in terms of a scalar field on a lattice. Its dimensionless action can be
written as

XX
S=
(φ(i + µ) − φ(i))2 + m20 φ2 (i) ,
(306)
i

µ

where i labels discrete lattice points and µ unit vectors in the different lattice directions. The correlation length is approximately 1/m0 lattice spacings. Holding a fixed
and increasing N4 is not going to change the correlation length in any significant way
if N4 is sufficiently large. Thus the interpretation for fixed a is straightforward: the
physical volume V4 is simply increased and finite-size effects will become smaller and
smaller. However, we can also insist on an interpretation where V4 is kept fixed, N4
is increased and a decreased accordingly. In this case, the lattice becomes finer and
finer with increasing N4 . But now the physical interpretation of (306) will change
with increasing N4 , even if no bare coupling constant is changed, and the correlation
length is still approximately 1/m0 lattice spacings. Since the physical lattice length
1/4
a decreases proportional to 1/N4 the physical correlation length is going to zero,
and the physical mass to infinity. This can be made explicit in (306) by introducing
31

In principle, we should be taking into account the different volumes of the two types of foursimplices, which depend on ∆, but we will ignore these details to streamline the presentation.

124

the lattice spacing a,
1 X 4
S= 2
a
a i

X  (φ(i + µ) − φ(i))2 
a2

µ

!
m20 2
+ 2 φ (i) .
a

(307)

The physical mass is mph = m0 /a and goes to infinity unless we adjust m0 . The
factor 1/a2 in front of the sum can be reabsorbed in a redefinition of φ if desired.
In our case it is natural to consider V4 as fixed if we want to make contact with
the continuum framework of asymptotic safety, since this will allow us to vary a.
However, like in the ordinary field theory case just discussed, it requires the finetuning of some coupling constants to consider V4 as fixed when N4 → ∞. In the
free field case we had to fine-tune the bare mass m0 to zero as N4 → ∞. In the
gravity case the need for a fine-tuning of some kind is also clear if we consider Fig.
26. The bars indicated in the figure refer to a specific spacetime four-volume which
we label by N4 , without any reference to a. For a given choice of bare coupling
constants the size of the bars reflects real fluctuations of the three-volumes of our
quantum universe. When N4 increases, but the bare coupling constants are kept
fixed, we saw that the relative size of the fluctuations went to zero. This is an
indication that we should view V4 as going to infinity when N4 → ∞. It is natural
to assume that if we want to have the physics associated with the continuum volume
V4 (approximately) invariant when N4 → ∞, the relative fluctuations δV3 (t)/V3 (t)
of V3 (t) must be constant as a function of N4 . This is only possible by changing the
bare coupling constants. As discussed above, it is not a foregone conclusion that
this can be achieved. For instance, we may have to enlarge the coupling constant
space to also include the fluctuations of N4 (and thus only talk about hV4 i, and not
V4 ), i.e. reintroduce the cosmological constant.
Let us assume it is possible to change the bare coupling constants in such a way
that we can stay on a trajectory where V4 can be considered fixed when N4 → ∞.
Choosing the right starting point, such a trajectory may lead us to a fixed point, say,
the point P0 in our phase diagram. We can also imagine a scenario where different
choices of starting point lead us to different points along the B-C transition line, if
it is a second-order phase transition line. If P0 is a UV fixed point, eq. (301) makes
it clear what to expect. Using (305), we can convert it into an equation involving
N4 and suitable for application in CDT simulations, namely,
−c̃/4

k1 (N4 ) = k1c − K̃N4

.

(308)

When we measured k1 (N4 ) deep inside phase C (at the point (κ0 , ∆) = (2.2, 0.6)),
we did not find any N4 -dependence of k1 . However, according to the insights just
presented, we should observe such a dependence close to a UV fixed point when we
follow a path in the coupling constant space where the continuum four-volume V4
can be considered constant. An explicit verification of such a relation will have to
await more reliable computer simulations close to the phase transition lines.
125

How could such an analysis proceed more concretely in CDT quantum gravity?
Recall the “naı̈ve” renormalization conditions (200) and (204), introduced mainly to
illustrate how a renormalization procedure could lead to finite renormalized cosmological and gravitational constants, both with a semiclassical interpretation. Close
to the UV fixed point, we know that G will not be constant when we change scale,
but Ĝ will. Writing G(a) = a2 Ĝ∗ , eqs. (200) and (204) are changed to
κ4 − κc4 =

Λ
Ĝ∗

a2 ,

k1 (κc0 ) =

1
Ĝ∗

.

(309)

The first of these relations now looks two-dimensional (cf. eq. (127))! Nevertheless,
the expectation value of the four-volume still satisfies the correct relation
hV4 i = hN4 i a4 ∝

1
,
Λ2

(310)

as follows from (205). The second one of the relations in (309) tells us that it is not
per se a problem if k1 does not go to zero along the B-C phase boundary, something
we did not find strongly supported by the data (see the discussion in Sec. 11).
Formulas like (309) and (310) illustrate that one way to get a handle on the
relation V4 = a4 N4 is by invoking the cosmological constant. This is natural since the
four-volume is the variable conjugate to the cosmological constant. Unfortunately,
as already mentioned a number of times, it is not very practical from the point
of view of the numerical simulations and would add another coupling constant to
the discussion, thus complicating the numerics. It is important to try to find an
independent way to ensure one stays on trajectories V4 = const..
Finally, a UV fixed point of Ĝ implies that G(a) scales “anomalously” like a2 .
This anomalous scaling near the fixed point is the reason why the spectral dimension
in both the asymptotic safety and the Hořava-Lifshiz scenario is 2 and not 4 [97, 111].

14

Conclusion

In this report, we have described an attempt to formulate a nonperturbative theory
of four-dimensional quantum gravity using the path integral. More specifically, we
have collected and reviewed results obtained by using Causal Dynamical Triangulations.
For gravitational theories, the path-integral prescription to “sum over all geometries” leaves open what is meant by “all geometries”. Our choice follows closely that
of the path integral in ordinary quantum mechanics. There, one starts by summing
over a set of piecewise linear paths and – after taking a suitable continuum limit –
ends up summing over all continuous paths. For the case of gravity, this motivated
us to construct the path integral by summing over a class of piecewise linear geometries, which have the additional virtue that their geometry can be defined without
the use of coordinates. This enabled us to define a genuinely geometric path integral
126

with a lattice cutoff. The entire construction is well defined for Lorentzian signature,
and the setting accommodates in a natural way the use of different lattice spacings
in the time and spatial directions, although in the first place one would not expect
the choice to matter from a continuum perspective.
Being able to formulate a path integral over Lorentzian geometries in this way
is excellent, but needs to be followed by evaluating it if we are going to extract
physical consequences from it. The nonperturbative nature of the path integral
makes this difficult in the Lorentzian regime, certainly in four dimensions, which
has our main interest. What comes to our help at this stage is a remarkable feature
of the theory, namely, that any piecewise linear geometry contributing to the path
integral allows for a rotation to Euclidean signature in such a way that the usually
formal relation between the Lorentzian- and the Euclidean-signature action is valid.
After performing this “Wick rotation”, we can try to evaluate the path integral in the
Euclidean sector, where we have the usual tools from Euclidean quantum field theory
available, in particular, Monte Carlo simulations. By varying the bare coupling
constants of the regularized lattice theory we mapped out the phase diagram of
this “auxiliary” Euclidean theory. Somewhat surprisingly, it closely resembled a
so-called Lifshitz phase diagram with a tricritical point; even more surprisingly, the
characterization of the different phases in terms of an order parameter we loosely
called “average geometry” had some similarity with the phases of a Lifshitz diagram.
While the qualitative features of the phase diagram had been known to us for some
time, it was the advent of a new class of potential quantum gravity theories, the socalled Hořava-Lifshitz theories, which made us realize that an anisotropic scaling of
time vs. space may play a role in the interpretation of the observed phase structure.
Not only does our original path integral have Lorentzian signature, but we also
use its Lorentzian character to impose a notion of causality on individual pathintegral histories, as first suggested by Teitelboim. All path-integral configurations
are required to have a product topology, of a given three-dimensional space and the
time direction. The absence of topology changes and associated causality-violating
branching points are in practice implemented by building up the histories in triangulated steps of unit proper time. The original motivation behind this choice was
the search for a class of geometries distinctly different from the full set of Euclidean
geometries of a fixed topology, which up to this point had led only to physically
meaningless results in a purely Euclidean implementation of dynamical triangulations. The presence of a time foliation and causality constraints in the new, causal
formulation enabled us – despite the randomness of the geometric structure – to
prove that the transfer matrix is (site)-reflection positive and thus most likely allows for a unitary theory.
It is interesting that several of the concepts just outlined have counterparts
in the new continuum theories suggested by Hořava, which were arrived at by a
rather different route. The latter may throw a new light on the role of “asymmetry”
between space and time. The possibility to introduce a finite relative scaling between
space and time distances is of course present in any lattice theory, once one has
127

identified a time direction. Given the sparseness of critical points it was therefore
natural to assume that also in CDT quantum gravity spacetime isotropy – to the
extent it is a meaningful property of the eventual, physical theory and its (Euclidean)
ground state or solutions – can be restored at a UV critical point. So far, our
analysis of the emergent de Sitter space in four dimensions is not in conflict with
this interpretation, but in light of Hořava’s results one should certainly take the
possibility of anisotropic32 , unitary limits into consideration. Our lattice formulation
appears to be the perfect setting to investigate this issue. The lattice implementation
of Hořava-Lifshitz gravity was initiated recently (in three spacetime dimensions) in
[118]. Based on the new evidence that the B-C transition line is second order, a
major effort is currently under way to understand the nature of the theory when
approaching this line: do we find evidence of an anisotropy between space and time,
with different scaling dimensions, and does the exponent of anisotropy change along
the line? Given that in the theory of critical phenomena end points are usually
associated with a transition of higher order than those of generic points along the
line, do they play a special role?
Most efforts until now have been focused on understanding the quantum universes well inside phase C, produced by the computer simulations. We have observed a universe whose average geometry can be identified with that of a round
four-sphere, with relatively small quantum fluctuations of the scale factor. We view
this as the infrared limit of our theory. The behaviour of the scale factor, including
quantum fluctuations, is described accurately by a minisuperspace model à la Hartle
and Hawking, which assumes homogeneity and isotropy from the outset, as reflected
in the truncated ansatz
ds2 = dt2 + a2 (t)dΩ23 ,
(311)
for the spacetime metric, with a(t) the scale factor of the universe, and dΩ23 the line
element of the three-sphere S 3 . Quantizing such a reduced model leads to what one
usually calls quantum cosmology, which entails a quantum-mechanical, as opposed
to a quantum field-theoretical description of the universe. In our model no such assumption is put in by hand. Instead, we integrate out all degrees of freedom except
the scale factor at the level of the quantum theory. Nevertheless, to the precision we
have been able to measure, the dynamics of this scale factor, including its fluctuations, is governed by the same minisuperspace action (229). Let us reiterate that
this result is not a triviality of the kind “of course, the infrared sector has to agree
with general relativity since you are using the Einstein-Hilbert action”. It is true
that S 4 is a solution of the equations of motion for the Euclidean Einstein-Hilbert
action with positive cosmological constant, but it is only a saddle point. There is
absolutely no reason why we should see this solution in our computer simulations if
the classical action was dominant. What we have found is a truly nonperturbative
result, originating from a subtle interplay between entropic contributions from the
32

both in the sense of a finite relative scaling for macroscopic geometry and of a different scaling
dimension in the UV

128

measure and the Einstein-Hilbert action. This is related to the observation that the
CDT model can be viewed as an “entropic” theory, due to the geometric nature of
the Einstein action on the piecewise linear geometries used. Being able to count
the number of CDT configurations for a given four-volume and a given number of
vertices would give us an exact, analytic handle on the partition function of full
quantum gravity! As we have argued in Sec. 7.1, the partition function plays the
role of a generating function for the number of triangulations.
The analysis of the infrared properties of the quantum universe allowed us to
relate the coupling constant appearing in the effective action for the scale factor to
the lattice spacing, thereby obtaining an estimate of the Planck scale in terms of
the unit lattice length a. Well inside phase C we established that one Planck length
corresponds to roughly half a lattice unit, which means that despite their small size
(the largest universe being about 20 Planck lengths across), in this part of phase
space we are not yet probing the “sub-Planckian” regime. On the other hand, we are
clearly dealing with quantum universes, since even the most macroscopic observable,
the total universe volume (a.k.a. the scale factor), undergoes sizeable quantum
fluctuations, as illustrated by Fig. 26. Although this is clearly an interesting and
relevant regime to understand the quantum structure of spacetime (recall that we
are operating with a “lattice window” which is merely of size ∼104 ), one obvious
aim is to move to other regions in the bare coupling constant space where the Planck
length is larger than a single lattice spacing, and study the UV physics there. For
example, this may enable us to quantitatively study quantum deviations from the
standard Friedmann behaviour for small scale factors (close to the big bang) [119].
These regions of coupling constant space appear to be located close to the transition
lines of the phase diagram. Of course, if we then still want to work with universes
of size 20ℓPl , much larger lattices will be required. We are encountering the usual
challenges of studying quantum field theories on a lattice!
The identification of the gravitational coupling constant is so far based on the
reconstruction of the effective action from measuring the scale factor. It is important
to get an independent verification of its interpretation as the coupling constant of
gravity. Since gravity – at least on sufficiently large scales – is defined as the universal
attraction between “matter”, one obvious way of trying this is by coupling matter
to the theory. It is technically straightforward to do this in the DT formalism, and
therefore also in CDT. In the context of Euclidean DT quantum gravity, combined
theories of gravity and various matter field theories have been studied extensively,
in both three and four dimensions [120, 121, 122]. Surprisingly little new insight was
gained from comparing the phase diagram with matter to that without matter33 .
At least perturbatively this may be understood from the fact that adding matter to
the action will from a gravitational point of view mainly lead to a shift in the bare
33

An exception is [122], which claimed that the addition of many U (1)-fields would cure the
problem of finding only a first-order phase transition in four-dimensional DT. However, the claim
is in disagreement with the results of [121]. The disagreement has never been resolved, nor has the
claim been substantiated further.

129

gravitational coupling constant.
Again in the context of Euclidean DT attempts have been made to study the
converse effect, namely, how gravity influences the matter sector [123], by trying to
measure how certain well-chosen matter correlators change, compared to those of
a flat or de Sitter spacetime. A preliminary investigation along the same lines in
CDT has revealed that both our universe and the value of the gravitational coupling constant G (extracted as explained above) are too small to make the effect
reported in [123] observable. Alternatively, one could try to measure the attraction between two “test particles”. As emphasized already in the Introduction, it
is highly nontrivial to find a theoretically well-defined way of implementing this
in the full, nonperturbative theory. Merely considering the length scales involved
(a strongly quantum-fluctuating universe of less than 20ℓPl across) makes it clear
that there is considerable scope for being misled by naı̈ve classical considerations.
This does not yet account for the fact that we are trying to extract properties of
the causal, Lorentzian theory from making measurements in the Euclidean sector.
Before embarking on substantial simulations and measurements, we should better
have a precise idea of what we are looking for.
Somewhat simpler conceptually is the situation of just a single test particle,
whose presence will modify the average “background” geometry away from the de
Sitter geometry observed for pure gravity. One point of reference one would expect
to be relevant here is the de Sitter-Schwarzschild solution with Euclidean signature,
a connection which has recently been addressed analytically [124]. The translation
of this analysis into a concrete measuring prescription for the combined system
“quantum universe plus particle” is work in progress. – As we have seen throughout
this report, this is just one of many interesting works in progress to further illuminate
the nature of quantum gravity, both addressing conceptual challenges and dealing
with their numerical implementation.

Acknowledgments
We thank K. Anagnostopoulos, D. Benedetti, T. Budd, B. Dittrich, J. GizbertStudnicki, S. Jordan, I. Khavkine, C.F. Kristjansen, R.L. Maitra, I. Pushkina, P.
Reska, T. Trzesniewski, G. Vernizzi, Y. Watabiki, W. Westra, F. Zamponi and S.
Zohren for collaboration on various parts of the ongoing CDT program. J.A. thanks
Utrecht University and the Perimeter Institute for hospitality and financial support.
J.A. and A.G. acknowledge financial support by the Danish Research Council (FNU)
through the grant “Quantum gravity and the role of black holes”. J.J. acknowledges
partial support of the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education under grant
182/N-QGG/2008/0. A.G. acknowledges a partial support by the Polish Ministry
of Science grant N N202 229137 (2009-2012).

130

y

y

δ
x

x

(a)

δ

(b)
Figure 42: Positive (a) and negative (b) Euclidean deficit angles δ.

Appendix 1: Lorentzian angles
In this appendix we will describe some properties of Lorentzian angles (or “boosts”)
which appear in the Regge scalar curvature as rotations about spacelike bones (that
is, spacelike links in three and spacelike triangles in four dimensions). This summarizes the treatment and conventions of [38]. The familiar form of a contribution of
a single bone b to the total curvature and therefore the action is
X
Θbi ,
(312)
∆b S = volume(b)δb , δb = 2π −
i

where the volume of the bone is by definition real and positive and δb is the deficit
angle around b. For the case of Euclidean angles this is conveniently illustrated by
a two-dimensional example, where the bone is simply a point with volume 1. A
positive deficit angle δ (Fig. 42a) implies a positive Gaussian curvature and therefore a positive contribution to the action, whereas an “excess” angle δ contributes
negatively (Fig. 42b). Lorentzian angles are also defined to be additive, in such
a way that a complete rotation around a spacelike bone gives 2π in the flat case.
However, note that the angles are in general complex, and can become arbitrarily
large in the vicinity of the light cone. In their contribution to the action, we have
to distinguish between two cases. If the Lorentzian deficit angle δ ≡ η is spacelike
(Fig. 43a), it contributes as ∆b S = volume(b)ηb , just like in the Euclidean case. By
contrast, if it is timelike (Fig. 43b), the deficit angle contributes with the opposite
sign, that is, as ∆b S = −volume(b)ηb . Therefore, both a spacelike defect and a
timelike excess increase the action, where as a timelike defect or a spacelike excess
decrease it.
The deficit angles in Secs 2.1 and 2.2 were calculated using
p
h~v1 , ~v1 ih~v2 , ~v2 i − h~v1 , ~v2 i2
h~v1 , ~v2 i
cos Θ =
,
sin
Θ
=
,
(313)
1
1
1
1
h~v1 , ~v1 i 2 h~v2 , ~v2 i 2
h~v1 , ~v1 i 2 h~v2 , ~v2 i 2
131

η
t

t

η
x

x

(a)

(b)

Figure 43: Positive spacelike (a) and timelike (b) Lorentzian deficit angles η.
for pairs of vectors ~v1 , ~v2 , and the flat Minkowskian scalar product h·, ·i. By definition, the square roots are positive imaginary for negative arguments.

Appendix 2: Link-reflection positivity in two dimensions
In this appendix we will demonstrate the link-reflection positivity of the discrete
model of two-dimensional Lorentzian quantum gravity introduced in [45]. Recall
that link reflection is the reflection at a plane of half-integer t. We choose it to lie
at t = 1/2 and fix the boundary spatial lengths at the initial time t = −T + 1 and
the final time t = T to l−T +1 = lT = l. In order to describe a two-dimensional
Lorentzian universe with these boundary conditions, we must not only specify the
geometry of the spatial sections (simply given by lt , −T + 1 ≤ t ≤ T ), but the
connectivity of the entire two-dimensional triangulation.
A convenient way of parametrizing the connectivity that is symmetric with respect to incoming and outgoing triangles at any given slice of constant t is as follows.
For any spatial slice at some integer time t, each of the lt spatial edges forms the
base of one incoming and one outgoing triangle. The geometry of the adjoining
sandwiches is determined by how these triangles are glued together pairwise along
their timelike edges. These gluing patterns correspond to distinct ordered partitions
of the lt triangles (either above or below t) into k groups, 1 ≤ k ≤ lt . We denote the
partitions collectively by m(t) = {mr (t), r = 1, . . . , k} for the incoming triangles
and by n(t) = {nr (t), r = 1, . . . , k ′ } for the outgoing triangles. The constraints on
P
P′
these variables are obviously kr=1 mr (t) = kr=1 nr (t) = lt and a matching condition for adjacent slices, namely, k ′ (t) = k(t + 1).34 In terms of these variables, the
34

This parametrization is closely related to the description of two-dimensional Lorentzian gravity

132

(unmarked) one-step propagator is given by
Gg (l1 , l2 ) = g l1 +l2

= g

l1 +l2

X 1
k
k≥1

X

1

nr ,mr ≥1, r=1,...,k
Pk
Pk
n =l ,
m =l
q=1 q 1
p=1 p 2

X 1 l1 − 1 l2 − 1 
,
l
l
k
2 −k
1 −k
k≥1

(314)

where g = e−λ depends on the two-dimensional cosmological constant λ. It is obvious
from (314) that the propagator depends symmetrically on the local variables m and
n. The partition function for the entire system is
Z2d (g) = Gg (l−T +1 , l−T +2 )

T
−1
Y

X

lt Gg (lt , lt+1 ),

(315)

t=−T +2 lt ≥1

in accordance with (80).
Following the discussion of link reflection in Sec. 6, we consider now functions
F ({m, n}) that depend only on the geometry above the reflecting plane at t = 1/2,
i.e. on m(t), n(t), t ≥ 1. The reflection (86) acts on the partition data according
to θl (m(t)) = n(−t + 1) and θl (n(t)) = m(−t + 1). Without loss of generality, we
can assume that F depends symmetrically on m(t) and n(t), ∀t. Computing the
expectation value (88), we obtain
h(θl F )F i =
−1


Y
X
X
−1
lt Gg (lt , lt+1 )(θl F )
l0 l1 Gg (l0 , l1 ) Gg (l−T +1 , l−T +2 )
Z2d
t=−T +2 lt ≥1

l0 ,l1 ≥1

−2
TY

×

X

t=1 lt+1 ≥1

Gg (lt , lt+1 )lt+1 Gg (lT −1 , lT )F



i.e.
h(θl F )F i =

−1
Z2d

−1
= Z2d

X

l0 l1

l0 ,l1 ≥1

X 1
k≥1

k

X 1
k
k≥1

g

l0 +l1

F (k)F (k).



l0 − 1
l0 − k



l1 − 1
l1 − k



F(l0 )F(l1 )
(316)

Since the last expression is a sum of positive terms, we have hereby shown that
two-dimensional Lorentzian gravity is link-reflection positive.
in terms of “half-edges” [43].

133

References
[1] S. Weinberg, Ultraviolet divergences in quantum theories of gravitation, in General relativity: Einstein centenary survey, eds. S.W. Hawking and W. Israel
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1979) 790-831.
[2] S. Catterall, Supersymmetric lattices [arXiv:1005.5346, hep-lat].
S. Catterall, D.B. Kaplan and M. Unsal, Exact lattice supersymmetry, Phys.
Rept. 484 (2009) 71 [arXiv:0903.4881, hep-lat].
[3] H. Kawai and M. Ninomiya, Renormalization group and quantum gravity, Nucl.
Phys. B 336 (1990) 115.
H. Kawai, Y. Kitazawa and M. Ninomiya, Scaling exponents in quantum gravity
near two-dimensions, Nucl. Phys. B 393 (1993) 280-300 [hep-th/9206081].
Ultraviolet stable fixed point and scaling relations in (2+epsilon)-dimensional
quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 404 (1993) 684-716 [hep-th/9303123];
Renormalizability of quantum gravity near two dimensions, Nucl. Phys. B 467
(1996) 313-331 [hep-th/9511217].
T. Aida, Y. Kitazawa, H. Kawai and M. Ninomiya, Conformal invariance and
renormalization group in quantum gravity near two-dimensions, Nucl. Phys. B
427 (1994) 158-180 [hep-th/9404171].
[4] M. Reuter, Nonperturbative evolution equation for quantum gravity,
Phys. Rev. D 57 (1998) 971-985 [hep-th/9605030].
[5] A. Codello, R. Percacci and C. Rahmede, Investigating the ultraviolet properties
of gravity with a Wilsonian renormalization group equation, Annals Phys. 324
(2009) 414 [arXiv:0805.2909, hep-th].
M. Reuter and F. Saueressig, Functional renormalization group equations,
asymptotic safety, and Quantum Einstein Gravity [arXiv:0708.1317, hep-th].
M. Niedermaier and M. Reuter, The asymptotic safety scenario in quantum
gravity, Living Rev. Rel. 9 (2006) 5.
H.W. Hamber and R.M. Williams, Nonlocal effective gravitational field equations and the running of Newton’s G, Phys. Rev. D 72 (2005) 044026 [hepth/0507017].
D.F. Litim, Fixed points of quantum gravity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 (2004) 201301
[hep-th/0312114].
[6] A.M. Polyakov, Compact gauge fields and the infrared catastrophe, Phys. Lett.
B 59 (1975) 82-84;
Quark confinement and topology of gauge groups, Nucl. Phys. B 120 (1977)
429-458.
[7] J. Ambjørn, B. Durhuus and J. Fröhlich, Diseases of triangulated random surface models, and possible cures, Nucl. Phys. B 257 (1985) 433-449.
134

J. Ambjørn, B. Durhuus, J. Fröhlich and P. Orland, The appearance of critical
dimensions in regulated string theories, Nucl. Phys. B 270 (1986) 457-482.
[8] F. David, Planar diagrams, two-dimensional lattice gravity and surface models,
Nucl. Phys. B 257 (1985) 45.
A. Billoire and F. David, Microcanonical simulations of randomly triangulated
planar random surfaces, Phys. Lett. B 168 (1986) 279-283.
[9] V.A. Kazakov, A.A. Migdal and I.K. Kostov, Critical properties of randomly
triangulated planar random surfaces, Phys. Lett. B 157 (1985) 295-300.
D.V. Boulatov, V.A. Kazakov, I.K. Kostov and A.A. Migdal, Analytical and
numerical study of the model of dynamically triangulated random surfaces, Nucl.
Phys. B 275 (1986) 641-686.
[10] J. Ambjørn and S. Varsted, Three-dimensional simplicial quantum gravity,
Nucl. Phys. B 373 (1992) 557-580;
Entropy estimate in three-dimensional simplicial quantum gravity, Phys. Lett.
B 266 (1991) 285-290.
J. Ambjørn, D.V. Boulatov, A. Krzywicki and S. Varsted, The vacuum in threedimensional simplicial quantum gravity, Phys. Lett. B 276 (1992) 432-436.
[11] M.E. Agishtein and A.A. Migdal, Three-dimensional quantum gravity as dynamical triangulation, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 6 (1991) 1863-1884.
[12] D.V. Boulatov and A. Krzywicki, On the phase diagram of three-dimensional
simplicial quantum gravity, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 6 (1991) 3005-3014.
[13] J. Ambjørn and J. Jurkiewicz, Four-dimensional simplicial quantum gravity,
Phys. Lett. B 278 (1992) 42-50.
[14] M.E. Agishtein and A.A. Migdal, Simulations of four-dimensional simplicial
quantum gravity, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 7 (1992) 1039-1062.
[15] J. Ambjørn and K.N. Anagnostopoulos, Quantum geometry of 2D gravity coupled to unitary matter, Nucl. Phys. B 497 (1997) 445 [hep-lat/9701006].
J. Ambjørn, K.N. Anagnostopoulos, U. Magnea and G. Thorleifsson, Geometrical interpretation of the KPZ exponents, Phys. Lett. B 388 (1996) 713 [heplat/9606012].
[16] J. Ambjørn, J. Jurkiewicz and Y. Watabiki, On the fractal structure of twodimensional quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 454 (1995) 313 [hep-lat/9507014].
J. Ambjørn and Y. Watabiki, Scaling in quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 445
(1995) 129 [hep-th/9501049].
[17] S. Catterall, G. Thorleifsson, M.J. Bowick and V. John, Scaling and the fractal
geometry of two-dimensional quantum gravity, Phys. Lett. B 354 (1995) 58-68
[hep-lat/9504009].
135

[18] J. Ambjørn and J. Jurkiewicz, Scaling in four-dimensional quantum gravity,
Nucl. Phys. B 451 (1995) 643-676 [arXiv:hep-th/9503006].
[19] B.V. de Bakker and J. Smit, Curvature and scaling in 4-d dynamical triangulation, Nucl. Phys. B 439 (1995) 239-258 [hep-lat/9407014].
S. Catterall, J. B. Kogut and R. Renken, Phase structure of four-dimensional
simplicial quantum gravity, Phys. Lett. B 328 (1994) 277-283 [hep-lat/9401026].
H.S. Egawa, T. Hotta, T. Izubuchi, N. Tsuda and T. Yukawa, Scaling behavior in 4-D simplicial quantum gravity, Prog. Theor. Phys. 97 (1997) 539-552
[hep-lat/9611028].
[20] K. Osterwalder and R. Schrader, Axioms for Euclidean Green’s functions I&
II, Commun. Math. Phys. 31 (1973) 83-112, 42 (1975) 281-305.
E. Seiler, Gauge theories as a problem of constructive quantum field theory and
statistical mechanics, Lecture Notes in Physics 159 (Springer, Berlin, 1982).
J. Glimm and A. Jaffe, Quantum physics, second edition (Springer, New York,
1987).
[21] K.S. Stelle, Renormalization of higher derivative quantum gravity, Phys. Rev.
D 16 (1977) 953-969.
[22] J.B. Hartle and S.W. Hawking, Wave function of the universe, Phys. Rev. D
28 (1983) 2960-2975.
[23] P.O. Mazur and E. Mottola, The path integral measure, conformal factor problem and stability of the ground state of quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 341
(1990) 187-212.
[24] P.D. Mannheim, Making the case for conformal gravity [arXiv:1101.2186, hepth];
Solution to the ghost problem in fourth order derivative theories, Found. Phys.
37 (2007) 532 [hep-th/0608154];
Conformal gravity challenges string theory [arXiv:0707.2283, hep-th].
[25] D. Blas, M. Shaposhnikov and D. Zenhausern, Scale-invariant alternatives to
general relativity, Phys. Rev. D 84 (2011) 044001 [arXiv:1104.1392, hep-th].
M. Shaposhnikov and D. Zenhausern, Scale invariance, unimodular gravity and
dark energy, Phys. Lett. B 671 (2009) 187 [arXiv:0809.3395, hep-th].
[26] P. Hořava, Quantum gravity at a Lifshitz point, Phys. Rev. D 79 (2009) 084008
[arXiv:0901.3775, hep-th].
P. Hořava and C.M. Melby-Thompson, General covariance in quantum gravity
at a Lifshitz point, Phys. Rev. D 82 (2010) 064027 [arXiv:1007.2410, hep-th];
Anisotropic conformal infinity [arXiv:0909.3841, hep-th].

136

[27] A. Ashtekar, D. Marolf, J. Mourao and T. Thiemann, Constructing Hamiltonian
quantum theories from path integrals in a diffeomorphism-invariant context,
Class. Quant. Grav. 17 (2000) 4919-4940 [quant-ph/9904094].
[28] R. Loll, Discrete Lorentzian quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 94
(2001) 96 [hep-th/0011194];
A discrete history of the Lorentzian path integral, Lect. Notes Phys. 631 (2003)
137 [hep-th/0212340].
J. Ambjørn, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, Quantum gravity, or The art of building
spacetime, in Approaches to quantum gravity, ed. D. Oriti (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2009) 341-359 [hep-th/0604212].
R. Loll, The emergence of spacetime or quantum gravity on your desktop, Class.
Quant. Grav. 25 (2008) 114006 [arXiv:0711.0273, gr-qc].
J. Ambjørn, A. Görlich, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, The emergence of (Euclidean) de Sitter space-time, in Path integrals - New trends and perspectives,
eds. W. Janke and A. Pelster (World Scientific, Singapore, 2008) 191-198;
The quantum universe, Acta Phys. Polon. B 39 (2008) 3309.
J. Ambjørn, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, Deriving spacetime from first principles,
Annalen Phys. 19 (2010) 186;
Causal dynamical triangulations and the quest for quantum gravity, in Foundations of space and time, eds. G. Ellis, J. Murugan and A. Weltman (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2012) [arXiv:1004.0352, hep-th];
Lattice quantum gravity - an update, PoS LATTICE 2010 (2010) 014
[arXiv:1105.5582, hep-lat].
[29] J. Ambjørn, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, Lorentzian and Euclidean quantum gravity: Analytical and numerical results, in Proceedings of M-theory and quantum
geometry, 1999 NATO Advanced Study Institute, Akureyri, Island, eds. L.
Thorlacius et al. (Kluwer, 2000) 382-449 [hep-th/0001124];
Quantum gravity as sum over spacetimes, Lect. Notes Phys. 807 (2010) 59
[arXiv:0906.3947, gr-qc].
J. Ambjørn, A. Görlich, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, CDT - an entropic theory
of quantum gravity [arXiv:1007.2560, hep-th].
[30] J. Ambjørn, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, The Universe from scratch, Contemp.
Phys. 47 (2006) 103 [hep-th/0509010];
The self-organized de Sitter universe, Int. J. Mod. Phys. D 17 (2009) 2515
[arXiv:0806.0397, gr-qc];
The self-organizing quantum universe, Sci. Am. 299N1 (2008) 42.
[31] R. Loll, Discrete approaches to quantum gravity in four-dimensions, Living Rev.
Rel. 1 (1998) 13 [gr-qc/9805049].
[32] C. Teitelboim, Causality versus gauge invariance in quantum gravity and supergravity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 50 (1983) 705-708;
137

The proper time gauge in quantum theory of gravitation, Phys. Rev. D 28 (1983)
297-309.
[33] S. Catterall and E. Mottola, The conformal mode in 2-D simplicial gravity,
Phys. Lett. B 467 (1999) 29 [hep-lat/9906032];
Reconstructing the conformal mode in simplicial gravity, Nucl. Phys. Proc.
Suppl. 83 (2000) 748 [hep-lat/9909074].
S. Catterall, E. Mottola and T. Bhattacharya, Dynamics of the conformal
mode and simplicial gravity, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 73 (1999) 792 [heplat/9809114].
[34] J. Zinn-Justin, Quantum field theory and critical phenomena, Int. Ser. Monogr.
Phys. 113 (2002) 1.
[35] J. Ambjørn, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, Dynamically triangulating Lorentzian
quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 610 (2001) 347-382 [hep-th/0105267].
[36] T. Regge, General relativity without coordinates, Nuovo Cim. 19 (1961) 558.
[37] J.A. Wheeler, Geometrodynamics and the issue of the final state, in Relativity,
groups and topology, eds. B. DeWitt and C. DeWitt (Gordon and Breach, New
York, 1964).
J.B. Hartle, Simplicial minisuperspace I. General discussion, J. Math. Phys. 26
(1985) 804-814.
[38] J. Louko and R.D. Sorkin, Complex actions in two-dimensional topology change,
Class. Quant. Grav. 14 (1997) 179 [gr-qc/9511023].
[39] J. Ambjørn, B. Durhuus and T. Jonsson, Quantum geometry. A statistical field
theory approach Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1997)
[40] J. Ambjørn, M. Carfora and A. Marzuoli, The geometry of dynamical triangulations, Lecture Notes in Physics, New Series, m 50 (Springer, Berlin, 1997)
[hep-th/9612069].
[41] J. Ambjørn and J. Jurkiewicz, On the exponential bound in four-dimensional
simplicial gravity, Phys. Lett. B 335 (1994) 355-358 [hep-lat/9405010].
B. Brügmann and E. Marinari, More on the exponential bound of fourdimensional simplicial quantum gravity, Phys. Lett. B 349 (1995) 35-41 [hepth/9411060].
[42] R. Nakayama, 2-D quantum gravity in the proper time gauge, Phys. Lett. B
325 (1994) 347 [hep-th/9312158].
[43] P. Di Francesco, E. Guitter and C. Kristjansen, Integrable 2d Lorentzian gravity
and random walks, Nucl. Phys. B 567 (2000) 515-553 [hep-th/9907084].
138

[44] I. Montvay and G. Münster, Quantum fields on a lattice (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK, 1994).
[45] J. Ambjørn and R. Loll, Non-perturbative Lorentzian quantum gravity, causality
and topology change, Nucl. Phys. B 536 (1998) 407-434 [hep-th/9805108].
[46] J. Ambjørn, R. Loll, J.L. Nielsen and J. Rolf, Euclidean and Lorentzian quantum gravity: Lessons from two-dimensions, Chaos Solitons Fractals 10 (1999)
177-195 [hep-th/9806241].
[47] S. Zohren, A causal perspective on random geometry [arXiv:0905.0213, hep-th].
[48] P. Di Francesco, E. Guitter and C. Kristjansen, Generalized Lorentzian gravity
in (1+1)D and the Calogero Hamiltonian, Nucl. Phys. B 608 (2001) 485-526
[hep-th/0010259].
[49] M. Ansari and F. Markopoulou, A statistical formalism of causal dynamical
triangulations, Nucl. Phys. B 726 (2005) 494-509 [hep-th/0505165].
[50] B. Durhuus and C.W.H. Lee, A string bit Hamiltonian approach to twodimensional quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 623 (2002) 201 [hep-th/0108149].
[51] F. Markopoulou and L. Smolin, Gauge fixing in causal dynamical triangulations,
Nucl. Phys. B 739 120-130 [hep-th/0409057].
[52] J. Ambjørn, K.N. Anagnostopoulos and R. Loll: A new perspective on matter coupling in 2d quantum gravity, Phys. Rev. D 60 (1999) 104035 [hepth/9904012].
[53] J. Ambjørn, K.N. Anagnostopoulos, R. Loll and I. Pushkina, Shaken, but not
stirred - Potts model coupled to quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 807 (2009) 251
[arXiv:0806.3506, hep-lat].
[54] D. Benedetti and R. Loll, Unexpected spin-off from quantum gravity, Physica
A 377 (2007) 373 [hep-lat/0603013];
Quantum gravity and matter: Counting graphs on causal dynamical triangulations, Gen. Rel. Grav. 39 (2007) 863 [gr-qc/0611075].
[55] J. Ambjørn, R. Loll, W. Westra and S. Zohren, Putting a cap on causality
violations in CDT, JHEP 0712 (2007) 017 [arXiv:0709.2784, gr-qc].
[56] J. Ambjørn, R. Loll, Y. Watabiki, W. Westra and S. Zohren, A string
field theory based on causal dynamical triangulations, JHEP 0805 (2008) 032
[arXiv:0802.0719, hep-th].

139

[57] J. Ambjørn, R. Loll, W. Westra and S. Zohren, A matrix model for 2D quantum
gravity defined by causal dynamical triangulations, Phys. Lett. B 665 (2008)
252-256 [arXiv:0804.0252, hep-th];
A new continuum limit of matrix models, Phys. Lett. B 670 (2008) 224
[arXiv:0810.2408, hep-th].
D. Benedetti and J. Henson, Imposing causality on a matrix model, Phys. Lett.
B 678 (2009) 222-226 [arXiv:0812.426, hep-th].
[58] J. Ambjørn, R. Janik, W. Westra and S. Zohren, The emergence of background geometry from quantum fluctuations, Phys. Lett. B 641 (2006) 94 [grqc/0607013].
[59] M. Ikehara, N. Ishibashi, H. Kawai, T. Mogami, R. Nakayama and N. Sasakura,
A note on string field theory in the temporal gauge, Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl.
118 (1995) 241-258 [hep-th/9409101].
[60] J. Ambjørn, R. Loll, W. Westra and S. Zohren, Stochastic quantization
and the role of time in quantum gravity, Phys. Lett. B 680 (2009) 359-364
[arXiv:0908.4224, hep-th].
[61] F. David, Loop equations and nonperturbative effects in two-dimensional quantum gravity, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 5 (1990) 1019-1030.
[62] J. Ambjørn, J. Jurkiewicz and Y.M. Makeenko, Multiloop correlators for twodimensional quantum gravity, Phys. Lett. B 251 (1990) 517-524.
J. Ambjørn, C.F. Kristjansen, Y.M. Makeenko, Higher genus correlators for
the complex matrix model, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 7 (1992) 3187-3202 [hepth/9207020].
J. Ambjørn, L. Chekhov, C.F. Kristjansen and Y.M. Makeenko, Matrix model
calculations beyond the spherical limit, Nucl. Phys. B 404 (1993) 127-172 [hepth/9302014].
[63] J. Ambjørn, R. Loll, W. Westra and S. Zohren, Summing over all topologies in
CDT string field theory, Phys. Lett. B 678 (2009) 227-232 [arXiv:0905.2108,
hep-th].
[64] J. Ambjørn, J. Correia, C. Kristjansen and R. Loll, On the relation between
Euclidean and Lorentzian 2-D quantum gravity, Phys. Lett. B 475 (2000) 2432 [hep-th/9912267].
[65] D.V. Boulatov and V.A. Kazakov, The Ising model on random planar lattice:
The structure of phase transition and the exact critical exponents, Phys. Lett.
B 186 (1987) 379.
[66] V.G. Knizhnik, A.M. Polyakov and A.B. Zamolodchikov, Fractal structure of
2D quantum gravity, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 3 (1988) 819.
140

F. David, Conformal field theories coupled to 2D gravity in the conformal gauge,
Mod. Phys. Lett. A 3 (1988) 1651.
J. Distler and H. Kawai, Conformal field theory and 2D quantum gravity or
Who’s afraid of Joseph Liouville?, Nucl. Phys. B 321 (1989) 509.
[67] J. Ambjørn, B. Durhuus and T. Jonsson, A Solvable 2-d gravity model with
gamma > 0, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 9 (1994) 1221 [hep-th/9401137].
J. Ambjørn, B. Durhuus, T. Jonsson and G. Thorleifsson, Matter fields with c
> 1 coupled to 2-d gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 398 (1993) 568 [hep-th/9208030].
[68] J. Ambjørn, J. Jurkiewicz, R. Loll and G. Vernizzi, Lorentzian 3d gravity with
wormholes via matrix models, JHEP 0109 (2001) 022 [hep-th/0106082];
3D Lorentzian quantum gravity from the asymmetric ABAB matrix model, Acta
Phys. Polon. B 34 (2003) 4667-4688 [hep-th/0311072].
J. Ambjørn, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, Renormalization of 3d quantum gravity
from matrix models, Phys. Lett. B 581 (2004) 255-262 [hep-th/0307263].
[69] B. Dittrich and R. Loll, A hexagon model for 3-D Lorentzian quantum cosmology, Phys. Rev. D 66 (2002) 084016 [hep-th/0204210].
[70] D. Benedetti, R. Loll and F. Zamponi, (2+1)-dimensional quantum gravity as
the continuum limit of causal dynamical triangulations, Phys. Rev. D 76 (2007)
104022 [arXiv:0704.3214, hep-th].
[71] J. Ambjørn, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, Non-perturbative 3d Lorentzian quantum
gravity, Phys. Rev. D 64 (2001) 044011 [hep-th/0011276].
[72] J. Henson, Coarse graining dynamical triangulations: A new scheme, Class.
Quant. Grav. 26 (2009) 175019 [arXiv:0907.5602, gr-qc].
[73] U. Pachner, Bistellare Äquivalenz kombinatorischer Mannigfaltigkeitten,
Arh.Math. 30 (1978) 89.
M. Gross and S. Varsted, Elementary moves and ergodicity in D-dimensional
simplicial quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 378 (1992) 367-380.
[74] B. Dittrich and R. Loll, Counting a black hole in Lorentzian product triangulations, Class. Quant. Grav. 23 (2006) 3849-3878
[75] S. Catterall, J.B. Kogut and R. Renken, Is there an exponential bound in fourdimensional simplicial gravity?, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72 (1994) 4062-4065 [heplat/9403019].
B.V. De Bakker and J. Smit, Volume dependence of the phase boundary in 4-D
dynamical triangulation, Phys. Lett. B 334 (1994) 304-308 [hep-lat/9405013].
[76] J. Ambjørn, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, A non-perturbative Lorentzian path integral for gravity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 (2000) 924 [hep-th/0002050];
141

Dynamically triangulating Lorentzian quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 610
(2001) 347-382 [hep-th/0105267].
[77] J. Ambjørn, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, Emergence of a 4D world from causal
quantum gravity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 (2004) 131301 [hep-th/0404156].
[78] J. Ambjørn, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, Reconstructing the universe, Phys. Rev.
D 72 (2005) 064014 [hep-th/0505154].
[79] J. Ambjørn, S. Jain, J. Jurkiewicz and C.F. Kristjansen, Observing 4-d
baby universes in quantum gravity, Phys. Lett. B 305 (1993) 208-213 [hepth/9303041].
J. Ambjørn, S. Jain and G. Thorleifsson, Baby universes in 2-d quantum gravity, Phys. Lett. B 307 (1993) 34-39 [hep-th/9303149].
[80] J. Ambjørn, P. Bialas, J. Jurkiewicz, Z. Burda and B. Petersson, Effective
sampling of random surfaces by baby universe surgery, Phys. Lett. B 325 (1994)
337-346 [hep-lat/9401022].
[81] J. Ambjørn, A. Görlich, S. Jordan, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, CDT meets
Hořava-Lifshitz gravity, Phys. Lett. B 690 (2010) 413-419 [arXiv:1002.3298,
hep-th].
[82] J. Ambjørn, S. Jordan, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, A second-order phase transition in CDT, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107 (2011) 211303 [arXiv:1108.3932, hep-th].
[83] J. Ambjørn, A. Görlich, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, Planckian birth of the quantum de Sitter universe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 (2008) 091304 [arXiv:0712.2485,
hep-th].
[84] J. Ambjørn, A. Görlich, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, The nonperturbative quantum
de Sitter universe, Phys. Rev. D 78 (2008) 063544 [arXiv:0807.4481, hep-th].
[85] J. Ambjørn, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, Semiclassical universe from first principles, Phys. Lett. B 607 (2005) 205-213 [hep-th/0411152].
[86] J. Ambjørn, A. Görlich, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, Geometry of the quantum
universe, Phys. Lett. B 690 (2010) 420-426 [arXiv:1001.4581, hep-th].
[87] R.M. Hornreich, M. Luban and S. Shtrikman, Critical behavior at the onset of
~k-space instability on the λ line, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35 (1975) 1678.
[88] N. Goldenfeld, Lectures on phase transitions and the renormalization group,
Addison-Wesley, Reading (Mass.) (1992).

142

[89] S. Catterall, G. Thorleifsson, J.B. Kogut and R. Renken, Singular vertices and
the triangulation space of the D sphere, Nucl. Phys. B 468 (1996) 263-276 [heplat/9512012].
P. Bialas, Z. Burda, B. Petersson and J. Tabaczek, Appearance of mother universe and singular vertices in random geometries, Nucl. Phys. B 495 (1997)
463-476 [hep-lat/9608030].
[90] P. Bialas, Z. Burda, A. Krzywicki and B. Petersson, Focusing on the fixed point
of 4-D simplicial gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 472 (1996) 293-308 [hep-lat/9601024].
S. Catterall, R. Renken and J.B. Kogut, Singular structure in 4-D simplicial
gravity, Phys. Lett. B 416 (1998) 274-280 [hep-lat/9709007].
[91] J. Ambjørn and B. Durhuus, Regularized bosonic strings need extrinsic curvature, Phys. Lett. B 188 (1987) 253.
[92] B. Durhuus, J. Fröhlich and T. Jonsson, Critical behavior in a model of planar
random surfaces, Nucl. Phys. B 240 (1984) 453; Phys. Lett. B 137 (1984) 93.
[93] F. David, A scenario for the c > 1 barrier in noncritical bosonic strings, Nucl.
Phys. B 487 (1997) 633-649 [hep-th/9610037].
[94] J. Ambjørn, A. Dasgupta, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, A Lorentzian cure for
Euclidean troubles, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 106 (2002) 977 [hep-th/0201104].
[95] A. Dasgupta and R. Loll, A proper time cure for the conformal sickness in
quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 606 (2001) 357 [hep-th/0103186].
[96] J. Ambjørn, A. Görlich, J. Jurkiewicz, R. Loll, J. Gizbert-Studnicki and
T. Trzesniewski, The semiclassical limit of causal dynamical triangulations,
Nucl. Phys. B 849 (2011) 144 [arXiv:1102.3929, hep-th].
[97] O. Lauscher and M. Reuter, Fractal spacetime structure in asymptotically safe
gravity, JHEP 0510 (2005) 050 [hep-th/0508202].
[98] T. Budd, The effective kinetic term in CDT [arXiv:1110.5158, gr-qc].
T. Budd and R. Loll, to appear.
[99] E. Kiritsis and G. Kofinas, Hořava-Lifshitz cosmology, Nucl. Phys. B 821 (2009)
467 [arXiv:0904.1334, hep-th].
[100] R. Brandenberger, Matter bounce in Hořava-Lifshitz cosmology, Phys. Rev. D
80 (2009) 043516 [arXiv:0904.2835, hep-th].
[101] G. Calcagni, Cosmology of the Lifshitz universe, JHEP 0909 (2009) 112
[arXiv:0904.0829, hep-th].
[102] D. Benedetti and J. Henson, Spectral geometry as a probe of quantum spacetime, Phys. Rev. D 80 (2009) 124036 [arXiv:0911.0401, hep-th].
143

[103] T. Jonsson and J.F. Wheater, The spectral dimension of the branched polymer
phase of two-dimensional quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 515 (1998) 549-574
[hep-lat/9710024].
[104] J. Ambjørn, D. Boulatov, J.L. Nielsen, J. Rolf and Y. Watabiki, The spectral
dimension of 2D quantum gravity, JHEP 9802 (1998) 010 [hep-th/9801099].
[105] J. Ambjørn, K.N. Anagnostopoulos, T. Ichihara, L. Jensen and Y. Watabiki,
Quantum geometry and diffusion, JHEP 9811 (1998) 022 [hep-lat/9808027].
[106] J. Ambjørn and K.N. Anagnostopoulos, Quantum geometry of 2D gravity coupled to unitary matter, Nucl. Phys. B 497 (1997) 445-478 [hep-lat/9701006].
[107] J. Ambjørn, J. Jurkiewicz and Y. Watabiki, On the fractal structure of
two-dimensional quantum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 454 (1995) 313-342 [heplat/9507014].
[108] J. Ambjørn, J. Jurkiewicz and R. Loll, Spectral dimension of the universe,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 (2005) 171301 [hep-th/0505113].
[109] J. Ambjørn, K.N. Anagnostopoulos, T. Ichihara, L. Jensen, N. Kawamoto,
Y. Watabiki and K. Yotsuji, Quantum geometry of topological gravity, Phys.
Lett. B 397 (1997) 177-184 [hep-lat/9611032].
[110] M.R. Atkin, G. Giasemidis and J.F. Wheater, Continuum random combs and
scale dependent spectral dimension [arXiv:1101.4174, hep-th].
[111] P. Hořava, Spectral dimension of the universe in quantum gravity at a Lifshitz
point, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 (2009) 161301 [arXiv:0902.3657, hep-th].
[112] S. Carlip, Spontaneous dimensional reduction in short-distance quantum gravity? [arXiv:0909.3329, gr-qc];
The small scale structure of spacetime [arXiv:1009.1136, gr-qc].
S. Carlip, R.A. Mosna and J.P.M. Pitelli, Vacuum fluctuations and the small
scale structure of spacetime [arXiv:1103.5993, gr-qc].
[113] T.P. Sotiriou, M. Visser and S. Weinfurtner, Spectral dimension as a probe of
the ultraviolet continuum regime of causal dynamical triangulations, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 107 (2011) 131303 [arXiv:1105.5646, gr-qc];
From dispersion relations to spectral dimension - and back again, Phys. Rev. D
84 (2011) 104018 [arXiv:1105.6098, hep-th].
M. Reuter and F. Saueressig, Fractal space-times under the microscope: A
renormalization group view on Monte Carlo data, JHEP 1112 (2011) 012
[arXiv:1110.5224, hep-th].

144

[114] S. Bilke, Z. Burda, A. Krzywicki, B. Petersson, J. Tabaczek and G. Thorleifsson, 4-D simplicial quantum gravity interacting with gauge matter fields, Phys.
Lett. B 418 (1998) 266 [hep-lat/9710077].
[115] S. Bilke, Z. Burda, A. Krzywicki, B. Petersson, J. Tabaczek and G. Thorleifsson, 4-D simplicial quantum gravity: Matter fields and the corresponding
effective action, Phys. Lett. B 432 (1998) 279 [hep-lat/9804011].
[116] J. Ambjørn, K.N. Anagnostopoulos and J. Jurkiewicz, Abelian gauge
fields coupled to simplicial quantum gravity, JHEP 9908 (1999) 016 [heplat/9907027].
[117] J. Laiho and D. Coumbe, Evidence for asymptotic safety from lattice quantum
gravity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107 (2011) 161301 [arXiv:1104.5505, hep-lat].
[118] C. Anderson, S.J. Carlip, J.H. Cooperman, P. Hořava, R.K. Kommu and
P.R. Zulkowski, Quantizing Horava-Lifshitz gravity via causal dynamical triangulations, Phys. Rev. D 85 (2012) 044027, 049904(E) [arXiv:1111.6634, hep-th].
[119] R.L. Maitra, Can causal dynamical triangulations probe factor-ordering issues?,, Acta Phys. Polon. Supp. 2 (2009) 563 [arXiv:0910.2117, gr-qc].
[120] J. Ambjørn, Z. Burda, J. Jurkiewicz and C.F. Kristjansen, 4-d quantum gravity coupled to matter, Phys. Rev. D 48 (1993) 3695-3703 [hep-th/9303042].
R.L. Renken, S.M. Catterall and J.B. Kogut, Three-dimensional quantum gravity coupled to Ising matter, Nucl. Phys. B 389 (1993) 601-610 [hep-lat/9205029].
J. Ambjørn, J. Jurkiewicz, S. Bilke, Z. Burda and B. Petersson, Z(2) gauge
matter coupled to 4-D simplicial quantum gravity, Mod. Phys. Lett. A 9 (1994)
2527-2542.
[121] J. Ambjørn, K.N. Anagnostopoulos and J. Jurkiewicz, Abelian gauge
fields coupled to simplicial quantum gravity, JHEP 9908 (1999) 016 [heplat/9907027].
[122] S. Horata, H.S. Egawa, N. Tsuda and T. Yukawa, Phase structure of fourdimensional simplicial quantum gravity with a U(1) gauge field, Prog. Theor.
Phys. 106 (2001) 1037-1050 [hep-lat/0004021].
[123] B.V. de Bakker and J. Smit, Gravitational binding in 4D dynamical triangulation, Nucl. Phys. B 484 (1997) 476-494 [hep-lat/9604023];
Correlations and binding in 4-D dynamical triangulation, Nucl. Phys. Proc.
Suppl. 47 (1996) 613-616. [hep-lat/9510041];
Euclidean gravity attracts, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 34 (1994) 739-741 [heplat/9311064].

145

[124] I. Khavkine, R. Loll and P. Reska, Coupling a point-like mass to quantum gravity with causal dynamical triangulations Class. Quant. Grav. 27 (2010) 185025
[arXiv:1002.4618, gr-qc].

146

