Submitted to the Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences. (Submitted on 10 Aug. 2017; revised 25 May 2018; accepted 24 Oct. 2018.)
JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

Statistical state dynamics of weak jets in barotropic beta-plane turbulence

arXiv:1708.03031v3 [physics.ao-ph] 1 Nov 2018

N IKOLAOS A. BAKAS
Laboratory of Meteorology and Climatology, Department of Physics, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece

NAVID C. C ONSTANTINOU∗
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA
Research School of Earth Sciences, Australian National University, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory, Australia
ARC Centre of Excellence for Climate Extremes, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, 2601, Australia

P ETROS J. I OANNOU
Department of Physics, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece

ABSTRACT
Zonal jets in a barotropic setup emerge out of homogeneous turbulence through a flow-forming instability
of the homogeneous turbulent state (‘zonostrophic instability’) which occurs as the turbulence intensity increases. This has been demonstrated using the statistical state dynamics (SSD) framework with a closure at
second order. Furthermore, it was shown that for small supercriticality the flow-forming instability follows
Ginzburg–Landau (G–L) dynamics. Here, the SSD framework is used to study the equilibration of this flowforming instability for small supercriticality. First, we compare the predictions of the weakly nonlinear G–L
dynamics to the fully nonlinear SSD dynamics closed at second order for a wide ranges of parameters. A
new branch of jet equilibria is revealed that is not contiguously connected with the G–L branch. This new
branch at weak supercriticalities involves jets with larger amplitude compared to the ones of the G–L branch.
Furthermore, this new branch continues even for subcritical values with respect to the linear flow-forming instability. Thus, a new nonlinear flow-forming instability out of homogeneous turbulence is revealed. Second,
we investigate how both the linear flow-forming instability and the novel nonlinear flow-forming instability
are equilibrated. We identify the physical processes underlying the jet equilibration as well as the types of eddies that contribute in each process. Third, we propose a modification of the diffusion coefficient of the G–L
dynamics that is able to capture the evolution of weak jets at scales other than the marginal scale (side-band
instabilities) for the linear flow-forming instability.

1. Introduction

tical State Dynamics (SSD) of the flow. SSD refers to
the dynamics that governs the statistics of the flow rather
than the dynamics of individual flow realizations. However, evolving the hierarchy of the flow statistics of a nonlinear dynamics soon becomes intractable; a turbulence
closure is needed. Unlike the usual paradigm of homogeneous isotropic turbulence, when strong coherent flows
coexist with the incoherent turbulent field, the SSD of the
turbulent flow is well captured by a second-order closure
(Farrell and Ioannou 2003, 2007, 2009; Tobias et al. 2011;
Srinivasan and Young 2012; Bakas and Ioannou 2013a;
Tobias and Marston 2013; Constantinou et al. 2014a,b;
Thomas et al. 2014; Ait-Chaalal et al. 2016; Constantinou et al. 2016; Farrell et al. 2016; Farrell and Ioannou
2017; Fitzgerald and Farrell 2018a; Frishman and Herbert
2018). Such a second-order closure comes in the literature under two names: ‘S3T’, which stands for Stochastic Structural Stability Theory (Farrell and Ioannou 2003)
and ‘CE2’, which stands for Cumulant Expansion of sec-

Robust eddy-driven zonal jets are ubiquitous in planetary atmospheres (Ingersoll 1990; Ingersoll et al. 2004;
Vasavada and Showman 2005). Laboratory experiments,
theoretical studies, and numerical simulations show that
small-scale turbulence self-organizes into large-scale coherent structures, which are predominantly zonal and, furthermore, that the small-scale turbulence supports the jets
against eddy mixing (Starr 1968; Huang and Robinson
1998; Read et al. 2007; Salyk et al. 2006). One of the simplest models, which is a testbed for theories regarding turbulence self-organization, is forced–dissipative barotropic
turbulence on a beta-plane.
An advantageous framework for understanding coherent zonal jet self-organization is the study of the Statis-

∗ Corresponding author address: Navid Constantinou, 142 Mills
Road, Building Jaeger 8, Research School of Earth Sciences, Australian
National University, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory, Australia.
E-mail: navid.constantinou@anu.edu.au

Generated using v4.3.2 of the AMS LATEX template

1

2

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

ond order (Marston et al. 2008). Hereafter, we refer to this
second-order closure as S3T.
Using the S3T second-order closure it was first theoretically predicted that zonal jets in barotropic beta-plane
turbulence emerge spontaneously out of a background of
homogeneous turbulence through an instability of the SSD
(Farrell and Ioannou 2007; Srinivasan and Young 2012).
That is, S3T predicts that jet formation is a bifurcation
phenomenon, similar to phase transitions, that appears as
the turbulence intensity crosses a critical threshold. This
prediction comes in contrast with the usual theories for
zonal jet formation that involve anisotropic arrest of the
inverse energy cascade at the Rhines’ scale (Rhines 1975;
Vallis and Maltrud 1993). Jet emergence as a bifurcation
was subsequently confirmed by comparison of the analytic
predictions of the S3T closure with direct numerical simulations (Constantinou et al. 2014a; Bakas and Ioannou
2014). This flow-forming SSD instability is markedly different from hydrodynamic instability in which the perturbations grow in a fixed mean flow. In the flow-forming instability, both the coherent mean flow and the incoherent
eddy field are allowed to change. The instability manifests
as follows: a weak zonal flow that is inserted in an otherwise homogeneous turbulent field, organizes the incoherent fluctuations to coherently reinforce the zonal flow.
This instability has analytic expression only in the SSD
and we therefore refer to this new kind of instabilities as
‘SSD instabilities’. In particular, the flow-forming ‘SSD
instability’ of the homogeneous turbulent state to zonal
jet mean flow perturbations is also referred to as ‘zonostrophic instability’ (Srinivasan and Young 2012).
Kraichnan (1976) suggested that the large-scale mean
flow is supported by small-scale eddies. Indeed, when the
large scales dominate the eddy field (i.e., when the largescale shear time, τm , is far shorter than the eddy turnover
time, τe ) the small-scale eddies have the tendency to flux
momentum and support large-scale mean flows (Shepherd
1987; Huang and Robinson 1998; Chen et al. 2006; Holloway 2010; Frishman and Herbert 2018). Under such
circumstances, we expect the S3T second-order closure
of the SSD to be accurate. Furthermore, Bouchet et al.
(2013) provided a proof that in the limit τe /τm → ∞ the
SSD of large-scale jets in equilibrium with their eddy field
are governed exactly by a second-order closure. Recent
studies revealed that the second-order closure remains accurate even at moderate scale separation between τm and
τe (see, e.g., Srinivasan and Young (2012); Marston et al.
(2014, 2016); Frishman et al. (2017); Frishman and Herbert (2018)). That is, the second-order closure manages to
reproduces fairly accurately the structure of the mean flow
even though there could be differences in the eddy spectra
and the concomitant eddy correlations; see, e.g., figure 1.
However, surprisingly enough, S3T remains accurate even at a perturbative level, i.e., when the mean

F IG . 1. Second-order closure can captures the mean flow dynamics despite differences in structure of eddy spectra. Here shown are the
energy spectra for a fully nonlinear simulation (eq. (1)) and its quasilinear approximation (i.e., employing the second-order closure). Both
simulations form 4 strong jets of similar strength. Setup as described
in section 5 with β /(k f r) = 70 and ε/(k2f r3 ) = 4 × 105 . Contours in
logarithmic scale and the same for both panels.

flows/jets are just emerging with τe /τm → 0 (the exactly opposite limit of Bouchet et al. (2013)). This
perturbative-level agreement is reported by Constantinou
et al. (2014a); Bakas and Ioannou (2013a, 2014) for
barotropic flows, by Bakas and Ioannou (2018) for baroclinic flows, by Fitzgerald and Farrell (2018a) for vertically sheared stratified flows, by Constantinou and Parker
(2018) for magnetized flows in astrophysical settings, and
by Farrell et al. (2017) for the formation of spanwise varying mean flows and mean vortices (streaks–rolls) in 3D
channel flows. The reason that the S3T second-order closure works well even for very weak mean flows should be
attributed to the existence of the collective flow-forming
instability which seems to overpower the disruptive eddy–
eddy nonlinear interactions, as long as the turbulent intensity is not exceptionally strong (which in most physical
situations is usually the case).
The dynamics that underlie the flow-forming SSD instability of the homogeneous state is well understood; Bakas
and Ioannou (2013b) and Bakas et al. (2015) studied in
detail this eddy–mean flow dynamics for barotropic flows
and Fitzgerald and Farrell (2018b) for stratified flows. In
these studies, the structures of the eddy field that produce
up-gradient momentum fluxes, and thus drive the instability, were determined in the appropriate limit τdiss /τm → 0,
with τdiss the dissipation time-scale.
While the processes by which the flow-forming instability manifests are well understood, we lack comprehensive understanding of how this instability is equilibrated.
For example, as the zonal jets grow they often merge or
branch to larger or smaller scales (Danilov and Gurarie
2004; Manfroi and Young 1999), multiple turbulence–

3

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

jet equilibria exist (Farrell and Ioannou 2007; Parker and
Krommes 2013; Constantinou et al. 2014a), and, also,
transitions from various turbulent jet attractors may occur (Bouchet et al. 2018). Some outstanding questions
include:
(i) How is the equilibration of the flow-forming instability achieved and at which amplitude for the given
parameters?
(ii) What are the eddy–mean flow dynamics involved in
the equilibration process as well as which eddies support the finite amplitude jets?
(iii) What type of instabilities are involved in the observed jet variability phenomenology (jet merging
and branching, multiple jet equilibria, transitions between various jet attractors) and what are the eddy–
mean flow dynamics involved?
To tackle these questions, Parker and Krommes (2013)
first pointed out the analogy of jet formation and pattern
formation (Hoyle 2006; Cross and Greenside 2009). Exploiting this analogy Parker and Krommes (2014) were
able to borrow tools and methods from pattern formation
theory to elucidate the equilibration process. In particular, they demonstrated that at small supercriticality, that
is when the turbulence intensity is just above the critical
threshold for jet formation, the nonlinear evolution of the
zonal jets follows Ginzburg–Landau (G–L) dynamics. In
addition, Parker and Krommes (2014) examined the quantitative accuracy of the G–L approximation by comparison with turbulent jet equilibria obtained from the fully
nonlinear S3T dynamics. Having established the validity of S3T dynamics even in the limit of very weak mean
flows/jets (as we have discussed above), it is natural to
then proceed studying the G–L dynamics of this flowforming instability and its associated equilibration process. The perturbative-level agreement of the S3T predictions with direct numerical simulations of the full nonlinear dynamics argues that the study of the equilibration
of the flow-forming instability using the G–L dynamics is
well founded.
In this work, we revisit the small-supercriticality regime
of Parker and Krommes (2014). We thoroughly test the
validity of the G–L approximation through a comparison
with the fully nonlinear SSD closed at second order for a
wide range parameter values (section 5). Apart from the
equilibrated flow-forming instability of the homogeneous
turbulent state, which is governed by the G–L dynamics,
we discover that an additional branch of jet equilibria exists for large values of β /(k f r) (β is the planetary vorticity gradient, r = 1/τdiss is the linear dissipation rate, and
1/k f is the length scale of the forcing). This new branch
of equilibria reveals that jets emerge as a cusp bifurcation,
which implies that for large β /(k f r) the emergent jets result from a nonlinear instability (see Fig 6(a)).

We investigate the eddy–mean flow dynamics involved
in the equilibration of the flow-forming instabilities, as
well as those involved in the secondary side-band jet instabilities that occur (section 6). To do this, we derive
the G–L equation in a physically intuitive way that allows
for the comprehensive understanding of the nonlinear Landau term involved in the G–L equation (section 4). Using
methods similar to the ones developed by Bakas and Ioannou (2013b) and Bakas et al. (2015) we study the contribution of the forced eddies and their interactions in supporting the equilibrated finite amplitude jets (section 6).
Finally, to elucidate the equilibration of the new branch
of jet equilibria that are not governed by the G–L dynamics, we develop an alternative reduced dynamical system
which generalizes the G–L equation (section 6b). Using
this reduced system we study the physical processes responsible for the equilibration of the new branch of jet
equilibria.
2. Statistical state dynamics of barotropic β -plane turbulence in the S3T second-order closure
Consider a non-divergent flow u∗ = (u∗ , υ∗ ) on a β plane with coordinates x∗ = (x∗ , y∗ ); x∗ is the zonal direction and y∗ the meridional direction. Subscript asterisks here denote dimensional variables. The flow is in
an unbounded domain, unless otherwise indicated. The
flow is derived from a streamfunction ψ∗ via (u∗ , υ∗ ) =
(−∂y∗ ψ∗ , ∂x∗ ψ∗ ). The relative vorticity of the flow is
def

def

ζ∗ = ∂x∗ υ∗ −∂y∗ u∗ = ∆∗ ψ∗ , with ∆∗ = ∂x2∗ +∂y2∗ the Laplacian. With stochastic excitation and linear dissipation the
relative vorticity evolves according to:
√
(1)
(∂t∗ + u∗ · ∇∗ )(ζ∗ + β∗ y∗ ) = −r∗ ζ∗ + ε∗ ξ∗ .
Linear dissipation at the rate r∗ parametrizes Ekman drag
at the surface of the planet. Turbulence is supported by the
random stirring ξ∗ (x∗ ,t∗ ) that injects energy in the flow
at rate ε∗ . This random stirring models vorticity sources
such as convection and/or baroclinic growth processes that
are absent in barotropic dynamics. The random process
ξ∗ is assumed (i) to have zero mean, (ii) to be spatially
and temporally statistically homogeneous, and (iii) to be
temporally delta-correlated but spatially correlated. Thus
it satisfies:
hξ∗ (x∗ ,t∗ )i = 0 and
(2a)
hξ∗ (xa∗ ,t∗1 )ξ∗ (xb∗ ,t∗2 )i = Q∗ (xa∗ − xb∗ ) δ (t1∗ − t2∗ ) ,
(2b)
with Q∗ the homogeneous spatial covariance of the forcing. Angle brackets denote ensemble averaging over realizations of the forcing. The forcing covariance is constructed by specifying a non-negative spectral power function Q̂∗ (k∗ ) as:
Q∗ (xa∗ − xb∗ ) =

Z

d 2 k∗
Q̂∗ (k∗ ) eik∗ ·(xa∗ −xb∗ ) .
(2π)2

(3)

4

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

In this work, we consider isotropic forcing with spectrum:
Q̂∗ (k∗ ) = 4π k f ∗ δ (k∗ − k f ∗ ) ,

(4)

def

where k∗ = |k∗ |. The forcing (4) excites equally all waves
with total wavenumber k f ∗ . The forcing spectrum is normalized so that the total energy injection is ε∗ .1
Equation (1) is non-dimensionalized using the forc−1
ing length scale k−1
f ∗ and the dissipation time scale r∗ .
The non-dimensional variables are: ζ = ζ∗ /r∗ , u =
√
−2 3
u∗ /(k−1
f ∗ r∗ ), ξ = ξ∗ /(k f ∗ r∗ ), ε = ε∗ /(k f ∗ r∗ ), β =
β∗ /(k f ∗ r∗ ) and r = 1. Thus, the non-dimensional version of (1) lacks all asterisks and has r = 1. The nondimensional form of Q̂∗ in (4) is obtained dropping the
asterisks and replacing k f ∗ 7→ 1.
The statistical state dynamics (SSD) of zonal jet formation in the S3T second-order closure comprise the dynamics of the first cumulant of the vorticity field ζ¯ (x,t), and
def

of the second cumulant C(xa , xb ,t) = ζ 0 (xa ,t)ζ 0 (xb ,t).
The overbars here denote zonal average, while dashes
denote fluctuations about the mean. Thus, ζ¯ = −∂y ū and,
the first cumulant of the flow can be equivalently described
with ū. Also, the eddy covariance C is therefore homogeneous in x: C(xa − xb , ya , yb ,t). Furthermore, the zonal average is assumed to satisfy the ergodic property, i.e., that
the average of any quantity is equal to an ensemble average over realizations of ξ : ( · ) = h( · )i.
After dropping terms involving the third cumulant we
can form the closed system for the evolution of the first
and second cumulants of the flow:
∂t ū = R(C) − ū ,
∂t C = −L C + N (ū,C) + ε Q .

(5a)
(5b)

The derivation of (5) has been presented many times; the
reader is referred to, e..g, the work by Farrell and Ioannou
(2003); Srinivasan and Young (2012); Bakas et al. (2015).
In (5), L is the operator given in (A1) that governs the linear eddy dynamics, and N is the nonlinear operator given
in (A2) that governs the interaction between the eddies
and the instantaneous mean flow ū(y,t). The mean flow
ū is driven by the ensemble mean eddy vorticity flux υ 0 ζ 0 ,
which is expressed as a linear function of the eddy vorticity covariance C through R(C) with R given in (A3).
The mean flow energy density, Em , and the eddy energy
density, E p , are:
1
d 2 x ū2 ,
2
∞
Z


2 1
Ep = d x
u0 (xa ) · u0 (xb ) a=b
2
∞
Z


2 1
−1
= − d x (∆−1
a + ∆b )C a=b ,
4
∞
Z

Em =

(6a)

(6b)

1 In numerical simulations, we approximate the delta-function in (4)
as a gaussian with narrow width—see section 5 for more details.

R def

L
L
where ∞ = limL→∞ (2L)−2 −L
−L , the subscripts on the
Laplacian indicate the specific variable the operator is acting, and subscript a = b implies that the function of xa
and xb , e.g., inside the square brackets on the right-handside of (6), is transformed into a function of a single variable by setting xa = xb = x. The total averaged energy
density relaxes over the dissipation scale (which is of O(1)
in the non-dimensional equations) to the energy supported
under stochastic forcing and dissipation:
h
εi
ε
def
E(t) = Em (t) + E p (t) = E(0) − e−2t + .
(7)
2
2

R

R

Therefore, the total energy remains bounded under S3T
dynamics (Bakas and Ioannou 2019).
3. The flow-forming instability and the underlying
eddy–mean flow dynamics
S3T dynamics under homogeneous stochastic forcing
admit, for all parameter values, a homogeneous equilibrium with zero mean flow and homogeneous eddy covariance:
ε
ūe = 0 , Ce (xa − xb ) = Q(xa − xb ) .
2

(8)

The homogeneous equilibrium state (8) becomes unstable
at certain parameter values and bifurcates to inhomogeneous equilibria, a class of which are zonal jets. The stability of the homogeneous state (8) is addressed by linearizing (5) around (8). Since (8) is homogeneous, the
eigenfunctions consist of a sinusoidal mean flow perturbation δ ū eσt and a perturbation covariance δC eσt with a
sinusoidal inhomogeneous part:
(h)

δ ū = einy , δC = C̃n (xa − xb ) ein(ya +yb )/2 ,

(9)

where n is a real wavenumber that indicates the lengthscale of the jets. The corresponding eigenvalues σ satisfy
(see Appendix A):
σ + 1 = f (σ |δ ū,Ce ) = ε f (σ |δ ū, Q/2) ,

(10)

where f is the vorticity flux induced by the distortion of
the eddy equilibrium field Ce by the mean flow δ ū; the expression for f is given in (A9). This induced vorticity flux
is referred to as the vorticity flux feedback on δ ū. For the
ring forcing considered in this study, the fastest growing
instability for n < 1 has a real eigenvalue σ and, therefore,
the emergent jets are not translating in the y direction. The
vorticity flux feedback at marginal stability


def
fr = Re f (σ = 0|δ ū, Q/2) ,

(11)

that is positive in this case, has the tendency to reinforce
the preexisting jet perturbation δ ū and therefore destabilizes it. With dissipation, the critical parameter ε at which

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

F IG . 2. Waves with with small |ky | (as in panel (a)) produce upgradient vorticity fluxes that destabilize any mean flow perturbation
superimposed on the homogeneous turbulent equilibrium; waves with
large |ky | (as in panel (b)) produce down-gradient vorticity fluxes that
tend to diminish mean flow perturbations.

the homogeneous equilibrium becomes
unstable to a jet

with wavenumber n is εt (n) = 1 fr and for all values of β
there is a minimum energy input rate
def

εc = min[εt (n)] ,
n

(12)

above which the homogeneous state is unstable and jet formation occurs.
It is instructive to identify which wave components (of
the incoherent flow) contribute to the instability process.
For the forcing spectrum (4) we may express the vorticity
flux feedback at the stability boundary (σ = 0) as
Z π/2

fr =

0

F (ϑ , n) dϑ ,

(13)

where F (ϑ , n) is the contribution to fr from the wave
components with wavevectors k = (± cos ϑ , ± sin ϑ )
when the homogeneous equilibrium is perturbed by a
jet perturbation with wavenumber n. Angle ϑ measures
the inclination of the wave phase lines with respect to
the y-axis. The precise expression for F (ϑ , n) is given
in (A12). Positive values of F indicate that waves with
phase lines inclined at angle |ϑ | produce up-gradient vorticity fluxes that are destabilizing the jet perturbation n.
In general, destabilizing vorticity fluxes are produced by
waves with phase lines closely aligned to the y-axis (with
small |ky |) as shown in Fig. 2.
Figures 3(a) and 3(b) show the contribution F (ϑ , n) as
a function of ϑ for the most unstable jet nc for the cases
with β = 0.1 and β = 100. When β  1, F (ϑ , n) is positive for angles satisfying 4 sin2 ϑ < 1 + n2 . This condition
is derived for β = 0, but is also quite accurate for small β ,
as shown in Fig. 3(a) (Bakas et al. 2015). The contribution
from all angles is small (of order β 2 ), as the positive contribution at small angles is compensated by the negative
contribution at larger angles. For β  1, only waves with
phase lines almost parallel to the y axis (|ky |≈ 0) contribute
significantly to the vorticity fluxes (see Fig. 3). When integrated over all angles, the resulting vorticity flux feedback

5

F IG . 3. The contribution F to the vorticity flux feedback fr for the
most unstable jet eigenfunction from the waves with phase lines inclined
at angle ϑ with respect to the meridional (solid curves). Panel (a) shows
the case with β = 0.1 while panel (b) for β = 100. In panel (a) the angle
ϑ = arcsin[ 12 (1+n2 )1/2 ] that separates the waves with positive (destabilizing) and negative (stabilizing) contribution to the vorticity flux feedback for β = 0 is indicated with the filled circle. Also, dashed curves
show the contribution FNL to the nonlinear Landau coefficient c3 for
the most unstable jet eigenfunction as a function of the wave angle ϑ
(see section 6).

is positive and O(β −2 ). The wave–mean flow dynamics
underlying these contributions at all values of β can be
understood by considering the evolution of wave groups
in the sinusoidal flow and were studied in detail by Bakas
and Ioannou (2013b).
4. The Ginzburg–Landau (G–L) dynamics governing
the nonlinear evolution of the flow-forming instability
In this section we discuss how the equilibration of the
zonal jet instabilities is achieved for the case just above the
critical threshold εc . As it will be seen, the weak zonal jet
equilibria are established through the equilibration of the
most unstable eigenfunction with wavenumber nc through
a nonlinear feedback which modulates the eddy covariance in order to conserve energy and forms jet structures
at the second harmonic 2nc . It is through this energy conservation feedback along with the interaction with the 2nc
jet that equilibration is achieved.
To derive the asymptotic dynamics that govern the evolution of the jet amplitude we perform a multiple-scale
perturbation analysis of the nonlinear dynamics near the
marginal point. Before proceeding with the multiple-scale
analysis we present an intuitive argument that suggests the
appropriate slow time and slow meridional spatial scales.
a. The appropriate slow length scale and slow time scale
For a stochastic excitation with energy input rate ε = εc ,
zonal jets with wavenumber n = nc are marginally stable.
If the energy input rate is slightly supercritical,
ε = εc (1 + µ 2 ) ,

(14)

6

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

with µ  1 a parameter that measures the supercriticality,
then zonal jets with wavenumbers |n − nc |= O(µ) are unstable and grow at a rate of O(µ 2 ). To see this expand the
eigenvalue relation (10) near εc :


∂f
σ = µ 2 εc f r + εc
σ
∂σ c




εc ∂ 2 f
+
(n − nc )2 + O σ 2 , (n − nc )3 , (15)
2
2 ∂n c
where the subscript c denotes that the derivatives are evaluated at the threshold point (σ , µ, n) = (0, 0, nc ).
Exactly at the minimum threshold, the function f has
a maximum at n = nc ((∂ f /∂ n)c = 0 and (∂ 2 f /∂ n2 )c <
0) with value εc fr = 1, which as seen from (10) implies
that σ = 0. Thus the approximate eigenvalue relation (15)
predicts that the locus of points of marginal stability (σ =
0) on the ε–n plane lie on the parabola:
(n − nc )2 =


 2µ 2
2
ε εc − 1 = 00 ,
00
| fc |
| fc |

(16)

def

where fc00 = ∂ 2 f /∂ n2 c and µ is the supercriticality parameter.
Using (15) we can estimate the growth rate σ at supercriticality µ. We find that jets with wavenumber n =
nc + µν grow approximately at rate:

σ = µ 2 (1 − c2 ν 2 ) c1 ,
(17)
with
def

c1 = 1 − εc



∂f
∂σ



def εc

and c2 =
c

2

| fc00 | .

(18)

The analytic expressions for c1 and c2 are given in (B13)
and (B20). Coefficient c1 is positive for stochastic excitations with spectrum (4). From (17), we deduce that for
any µ only jets with
√
|ν|< νe = 1 c2 ,
def

(19)

can become unstable.
Equations (16) and (17) establish the initial assertion:
for µ  1 zonal jets with wavenumbers |n − nc |= O(µ)
grow at a rate σ = O(µ 2 ).
The validity of the approximate eigenvalue relation (17)
as a function of supercriticality µ is shown in panels (a)
and (b) of Fig. 4. By comparing the exact growth rates as
given by (10) and the growth rates obtained from the approximation (17), we see that the approximate eigenvalue
dispersion may not be as accurate in three ways: predicting the maximum growth rate, predicting the wavenumber at which maximum growth occurs, and predicting the
asymmetry of the exact growth rates about the maximal
wavenumber. These three differences are indicated by

the arrows in panels (a) and (b) of Fig. 4 and are quantified in panels (c) through (e). Panel (c) compares the
exact wavenumber of maximum growth nmax to the critical wavenumber nc assumed by approximation (17). We
see that nmax is very close to nc up to µ ≈ 1 with the error growing as µ 2 . This is in agreement with the error
in (15) being of O(σ 2 ). In addition, the exact growth
rate σ (nc ) is very close to µ 2 /c1 , as shown in Fig. 4(d)
for µ up to O(1); the growth rate being overestimated
by (17) for higher values. Finally, the parabolic approximation (17) to the growth rates predicts that the wavenumbers ±νe are marginally stable (σ (±νe ) = 0). Figure 4(e)
shows the exact growth rates at ±νe at µ = 0.5; these are
far from zero for both low and high values of β . The
parabolic approximation works best for intermediate range
β values, i.e., for β = O(1). To summarize, the approximated maximum growth rate µ 2 /c1 as well as the the critical wavenumber nc that achieves this maximum growth
are both good approximations for supercriticalities up to
µ = O(1); the parabolic dependence of growth rate for
wavenumbers away from nc is a good approximation at
µ > 0.1 only for intermediate values of β . As it will be
seen, this has implications on the validity of the weakly
nonlinear dynamics derived next.
b. G–L dynamics for weakly supercritical zonal jets
Since the excess energy available for flow formation is
of order µ 2 εc , we expect intuitively the mean flow amplitude to be of order µ. Therefore, to obtain the dynamics
that govern weakly supercritical zonal flows, we expand
the mean flow ū and the covariance C of the S3T equations (5) as:
ū = µ ū1 (y,Y, T ) + µ 2 ū2 (y,Y, T ) + O(µ 3 ) ,
C = Ce (xa − xb ) + µ C1 (xa , xb ,Ya ,Yb , T )

(20a)

+ µ 2 C2 (xa , xb ,Ya ,Yb , T ) + O(µ 3 ) .

(20b)

Guided by (16) and (17), we have assumed that the zonal
jet and its associated covariance evolve from the marginal
def
values at the slow time scale T = µ 2t, while being modudef
lated at the long meridional scale Y = µy.
Details of the perturbation analysis are given in the
Appendix B; here we present the backbone. We introduce (20) in (5) and gather terms with the same power
of µ. At leading order µ 0 , we recover the homogeneous
equilibrium (8). At order µ 1 , the emergent zonal jet and
the covariance are the modulated S3T eigenfunction:
ū1 = A(Y, T ) einc y + c.c. ,

C1 = A(Ya , T ) G+
c (0|xa − xb )

(21a)
(21b)
 in (y +y )/2
c a
b
e
+ c.c. ,

−A(Yb , T ) G−
c (0|xa − xb )

with G±
c defined in (A8) and evaluated at n = nc .

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

7

F IG . 4. Validity of the approximate eigenvalue relation (17). (a) Comparison of the growth rates for jet perturbations with wavenumber ν as
predicted by the exact eigenvalue relation (10) (solid curve) and by the parabolic approximation (17) (dashed curve) for supercriticality µ = 0.5
and β = 1. Circles mark the maximum growth rate: for (10) this is at wavenumber nmax , while for (17) at nc . (b) Same as panel (a) but for β = 100.
(c) The difference between the exact wavenumber of maximum growth nmax and the approximate wavenumber of maximum growth nc as a
function of the supercriticality µ. (d) The relative difference between the exact growth rate σ for a jet at wavenumber nc and the approximate
growth rate µ 2 /c1 as a function of supercriticality µ. (e) The exact growth rate of jet perturbations with wavenumbers νe and −νe as a function
of β for supercriticality µ = 0.5. The parabolic approximation predicts zero growth for these marginal wavenumbers.

Having determined C1 we proceed to determine the order µ 2 correction of the covariance, C2 . This step of the
calculation is facilitated if we disregard the dependence on
the slow spatial scale Y in the amplitude A, as well as that
in C1 and C2 . Parker and Krommes (2014) showed that the
nonlinear term of the asymptotic dynamics responsible for
the equilibration of the amplitude A can be obtained using
this simplification, while the contribution to the asymptotic dynamics from the slow varying latitude Y is the addition of a diffusion term with the diffusion coefficient c2
in (18). At order µ 2 a zonal jet with wavenumber 2nc
emerges:
ū2 = α2 A(T )2 e2inc y + c.c. ,
(22a)
where α2 is given in (B7) and for the forcing considered is
negative (α2 < 0). The associated covariance at order µ 2 ,
C2 = Ce (xa − xb ) +C20 (xa − xb , T )
2inc (ya +yb )/2

+C22 (xa − xb , T ) e

eddy energy. This decrease is facilitated by a concomitant
change of the eddy covariance at order µ 2 . Specifically,
by introducing perturbation expansion (20) in (7) at steady
state, we obtain at leading order, µ 0 , the trivial balance:
−

(22b)

consists of the homogeneous part, Ce + C20 , and also an
inhomogeneous contribution at wavenumber 2nc . (Note
that, as implied by (14), the forcing covariance Q appears
both at order µ 0 and at order µ 2 .)
The homogeneous covariance contribution, Ce +C20 , is
required at order µ 2 so that the energy conservation (7)
is satisfied. To show this note that as the instability develops on a slow time scale, the total energy density has
already assumed (over an order one time scale) its steady
state value ε/2 (see (7)) and therefore, the mean flow energy growth must be accompanied by a decrease in the

d2x

∞


1  −1
εc
.
(∆a + ∆−1
)Ce a=b =
b
4
2

(23)

At order µ 1 the eddy covariance does not contribute to the
energy since C1 is harmonic in y and integrates to zero:
Z
∞

d2x


1  −1
(∆a + ∆−1
)C1 a=b = 0 .
b
4

(24)

At order µ 2 we use (i) (23) and (ii) that the inhomogeneous
component C22 e2inc (ya +yb )/2 is harmonic and integrates to
zero, to obtain:
Z

+ c.c. ,

Z

∞

d2x

Z

1
1  −1
(∆a + ∆−1
)C
=
d 2 x ū21 .
20 a=b
b
4
2
∞

(25)

Thus the homogeneous deviation from the equilibrium
covariance must produce a perturbation energy defect to
counter balance the energy growth of the mean flow. We
refer to C20 as the eddy energy correction term. However,
we note that the correction to the homogeneous part of the
covariance does not only change the mean eddy energy
but also other eddy characteristics, such as the mean eddy
anisotropy, that also might play a role in the equilibration
process.
At order µ 3 secular terms appear which, if suppressed,
yield an asymptotic perturbation expansion up to time

8

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

O(1/µ 2 ). Suppression of these secular terms requires that
the amplitude A of the most unstable jet with wavenumber nc satisfies:
c1 ∂T A = A − c3 A|A|2 .

(26)

If we now allow the amplitude to also evolve with the slow
scale, Y , and add the diffusion term c2 ∂Y2 A on the righthand-side of (26), we obtain the real Ginzburg–Landau
(G–L) equation:
c1 ∂T A = A + c2 ∂Y2 A − c3 A|A|2 .

(27)

For forcing with spectrum (4) all three coefficients c1 , c2 ,
and c3 are real and positive. The coefficients c1 and c2 , are
the coefficients in the Taylor expansion (15) and are given
in (18).
The G–L equation (27) has a steady solution A = 0.
This solution is linearly unstable to modal perturbations
eiνY +σ T , with growth rate µ 2 (1 − ν 2 c2 )/c1 ; the most unstable mode occurs at ν = 0. This is the flow-forming
SSD instability of the homogeneous equilibrium state in
the G–L framework (cf. (17)). The G–L equation has also
the nonlinear harmonic equilibria
q

A(Y ) = R0 (ν) ei(νY +ϕ) with R0 (ν) = (1 − ν 2 c2 ) c3 ,
(28)
and ϕ an undetermined phase that reflects the translational
invariance of the system in y. These equilibria are the possible finite-amplitude jets that emerge at low supercriticality. However, as will be shown in the next section, some
of these equilibria are susceptible to a secondary SSD instability and evolve through jet merging or jet branching
to the subset of the stable attracting states.
The G–L equation obeys potential dynamics and thus
the system always ends up in a stationary state which is
a local minimum of the potential (Cross and Greenside
2009). The ν = 0 jet is the state that corresponds to the
global minimum of the potential and it has amplitude
√
(29)
R0 (0) = 1 c3 .
5. Comparison of the predictions of G–L dynamics
with S3T dynamics for the equilibrated jets
In this section we test the validity of the weakly nonlinear G–L dynamics by comparing its predictions for the
amplitude of the equilibrated jets with fully nonlinear S3T
dynamics. We consider the S3T dynamical system (5) in
a doubly periodic domain 2πL∗ × 2πL∗ with a 1282 gridresolution and L∗ = 1, as well as the G–L dynamics with
periodic boundary conditions for the amplitude of the jet,
A, on the same domain. We approximate the delta function
in the ring forcing (4) with
2

δ (k∗ − k f ∗ ) 7→

TABLE 1. Exact values of non-dimensional planetary vorticity gradef

dient β = β∗ /(k f ∗ r∗ ) used in the S3T simulations of section 5 and their
corresponding values of the dimensional critical wavenumber nc∗ .
Notation
β1
β3
β6
β12
β24
β58
β192

β
1.1915
3.0235
6.2761
12.136
24.576
58.137
192.62

nc∗
8
7
6
5
4
3
2

with kx∗ L∗ , ky∗ L∗ assuming integer values. (The asterisks
denote dimensional values, as in, e.g., (1).) Forcing (30)
injects energy in a narrow ring in wavenumber space with
radius k f ∗ L∗ = 10 and width δ f ∗ L∗ = 1.5. We note that
even though (30) is a good approximation of the deltaring forcing (4)), small quantitative differences are to be
expected. For example, the critical energy input rates for
jet emergence obtained from the discrete finite ring excitation differ by as much as 4% from the corresponding
values obtained from the delta-ring forcing (4). Since the
equilibrated jet amplitudes are of order µ  1, we use the
exact values for the critical energy input rates obtained for
the discrete finite ring excitation.
We also consider r∗ = 0.1 and vary β∗ as well as the
energy input rate ε∗ that is the bifurcation parameter. The
eigenvalue relation for the flow-forming instability can be
readily obtained by substituting the integrals in (10) with
sums over the allowed wavenumbers. However, the comparison with the predictions of the G–L dynamics with
periodic boundary conditions in the meridional is more
tricky. Due to the periodic boundary conditions in the
jet amplitude, a harmonic mean flow A(Y, T ) = eiνY with
wavenumber ν corresponds to a mean flow within our
domain only if its dimensional wavenumber n∗ = (µν +
nc )k f ∗ is an integer. Therefore, we carefully pick β∗ so that
the marginal wavenumber nc k f ∗ always assumes an integer value; for k f ∗ = 10/L∗ this leaves us with nine possible
values for β∗ covering the range 3 × 10−1 < β∗ < 2 × 103 .
The lowest and highest marginal β∗ -values yield marginal
jets at the lowest and highest allowed wavenumber possible within our domain; 1/L∗ and k f ∗ − 1/L∗ respectively.
We excluded these values for β∗ , since they do not allow
us to study the finite amplitude stability of side-band jets
(i.e., jets at larger or smaller scale compared to the scale
of nc∗ ). Therefore, in our comparisons we use only the
remaining seven values of β∗ , which are shown in Table 1.
We calculate the finite amplitude equilibrated jets from
the nonlinear S3T dynamical system (5) using a Newton’s
method with the initial guess provided by (29).2 All jet
equilibria we compute in this section are hydrodynami-

2

e−(k∗ −k f ∗ ) /(2 δ f ∗ )
√
,
2πδ f ∗

(30)

2 For details regarding Newton’s algorithm for system (5) the reader
is referred to the Appendix I in the thesis of Constantinou (2015).

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

9

F IG . 5. The amplitude µA of the equilibrated most unstable jet with wavenumber nc as a function of supercriticality µ for four values of β . The
G–L branch is shown with circles ; the upper branch (which appears for β ' 20) is shown with triangles 4. Solid lines show the jet amplitude
as predicted by the G–L (cf. (29)).

F IG . 6. The bifurcation diagram for β58 (case shown in panel (c) of Fig. 5). (a) The amplitude µA of the equilibrated most unstable jet with
wavenumber nc as a function of the energy input rate. Squares denote the homogeneous equilibrium, circles the lower branch predicted by the
G–L dynamics and the triangles the upper branch of equilibria. Open symbols denote unstable jet equilibria with respect to S3T dynamics; filled
symbols denote stable jet equilibria. Multiple stable equilibria exist for 0.89 ≤ ε/εc ≤ 1.068. A comparison of the jet equilibrium structure and the
jet spectra for ε = 1.0025 (which corresponds to µ = 0.05) is shown in panels (b)-(d). Panels (b), (d) show the lower G–L branch jet; Panels (c),
(e) show the upper branch jet. In panel (d) the amplitude prediction for nc by (29) and for 2nc by (22a) is also shown (open circles).

cally stable. At small supercriticalities the jet amplitude is
small and the linear operator is dominated by dissipation.
Thus, all instabilities we discus here are “SSD instabilities” (see the discussion in §3 of section 1).
a. Equilibration of the most unstable jet, nc
Consider first the most unstable jet perturbation with
wavenumber nc . Figure 5 shows the Fourier amplitude

of the equilibrated jet dominated by wavenumber nc for
four values of β . We see that for β / 12, the amplitude
is given, to a very good approximation, by (29) for supercriticality up to µ ≈ 0.2 (see panels (a)-(b)). For larger
supercriticality, the amplitude of the equilibrated jet is not
well captured by (29); the jet amplitude is overestimated
for β / 12 while it is underestimated for β ' 12. We note
here, that S3T equilibria with dominant wavenumber nc

10

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

(as predicted by the G–L dynamics) exist at even larger
supercriticalities but these were found to be S3T unstable.
Surprisingly, for β ' 20 there exist multiple equilibria for the same supercriticality µ (see panels (c)-(d) of
Fig. 5). Specifically, there exists a branch of stable equilibria apart from the jets connected to the homogeneous
equilibrium (cf. triangles in Fig. 5(c)-(d) versus the circles). For µ ' 0.2, the lower branch equilibria, predicted
by the G–L dynamics, do not exist; an infinitesimal harmonic jet perturbation with wavenumber nc ends up in the
upper branch. Equally interesting is the fact that the upper branch extends to subcritical values of the energy input
rate with respect to the flow-forming instability of the homogeneous state, i.e. for ε < εc . This is shown in Fig. 6(a)
for β58 and similar subcritical jet equilibria were found for
β24 and β192 (not shown). Thus, apart from the linear instability forming jets that has been extensively studied in
the literature, there is a nonlinear instability for jet formation the details of which will be discussed in section 6b.
Since both the upper and the lower branch exist for a limited range of energy input rates, there is a hysterisis loop
shown in Fig. 6(a), with the dynamics landing on the upper or the lower branch of jet equilibria as ε is varied. The
two stable branches are connected with a branch of unstable equilibria (open circles) that were also found using
Newton’s method.
The jets on the lower and the upper stable branch are
qualitatively different. Panels (b)-(e) of Fig. 6 compare
the jet structure and spectra of two such equilibria in the
case of β58 and µ = 0.05. While the lower branch jet consists mainly of nc and its double harmonic, 2nc , with a
much weaker Fourier amplitude in qualitative agreement
with the G–L prediction of u2 ≈ O(µ 2 A2 ) (c.f. (22a)), the
upper branch jet is stronger by two orders of magnitude,
it contains more harmonics and the Fourier amplitude of
the double harmonic 2nc is about half the amplitude of the
leading harmonic nc . As will be elaborated in section 6b,
it is the interaction of the two jets with wavenumbers nc
and 2nc that supports the upper branch equilibria.

while the exact dispersion relation predicts that jets with
ν+ and ν− are rendered neutral at µex+ = 0.2140 and
µex− = 0.7953 respectively. We therefore expect significant deviations from (28) for the amplitude of the equilibrated jets.
Figure 7 shows the equilibrated amplitude of the side
band jet perturbations with ν ± as a function of supercriticality for four values of β . While the functional dependence of the equilibrated amplitude on µ is qualitatively captured by (28) (dashed lines), there are significant
quantitative differences especially for β1 and β192 . Since
these quantitative differences are due to the failure of the
parabolic approximation, a way to rectify them is to use
an equivalent

b. Equilibration of the side-band jets, nc ± 1/(k f ∗ L∗ )

6. The physical processes underlying the equilibration
of the SSD instability of the homogeneous state

We now consider the jet equilibria that emerge from
the equilibration of jet perturbations with wavenumbers
close to nc . While for an infinite domain there is a dense
set of unstable jet perturbations with wavenumbers µν
close to nc (cf. (19)), for the doubly periodic box the
first side band jet instabilities have dimensional wavenum±
bers n±
∗ = nc k f ∗ ± 1/L∗ , or ν = ±1/(k f ∗ L∗ µ). Introduc±
ing ν in (19), we obtain that the parabolic approximation predicts that the homogeneous equilibrium becomes
unstable to jet perturbations with wavenumber ν ± when
√
µGL > c2 /(k f ∗ L∗ ). However, as shown in Fig. 4(d), the
parabolic approximation is not accurate especially at low
and large values of β . For example for β1 , µGL = 0.4293,

def

= (k f ∗ L∗ µex± )2 ,
cex±
2

(31)

± obtained from the exbased on the supercriticality µex
act dispersion relation (10). The solid curves show the
predicted amplitude using cex±
2 . We observe that for all
values of β the amplitude of the jets close to the bifurcation point is accurately predicted and for the intermediate
value of β6 for which the exact dispersion is the closest
to the parabolic profile, the agreement holds away from
the bifurcation point as well. Finally, note that for large
β shown in Fig. 7(c) the additional upper branch of equilibria is found and has the same characteristics as the upper branch of nc equilibria. That is, the equilibrated jets
have a larger amplitude and the Fourier amplitude of the
double harmonic (in this case it is the 2(nc + 1/µk f ∗ L∗ )
harmonic) is much larger compared to the G-L branch.
Finally, we stress that the results in this section regarding the existence of the upper branch equilibria as well as
the accuracy of the G–L dynamics for the lower branch
equilibria are not quirks of the particular isotropic forcing structure in (4) but rather similar qualitative behavior
is found for forcing with anisotropic spectrum. Discussion regarding the effects of the structure of the forcing is
found in Appendix C.

One of the main objectives of this paper is to study
the processes that control the halting of the flow-forming
instability both for the low branch equilibria, which are
governed by the G–L dynamics, and for the upper branch
equilibria (cf. Figs. 5 and 6).
a. Equilibration processes for the lower branch
For G–L dynamics, the equilibration of the instability
for the most unstable jet perturbation with wavenumber nc
as well as for sideband jets (i.e., jets with scales close to
nc ) is controlled by coefficient c3 in (27). We start with

11

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

F IG . 7. The amplitude µA of the equilibrated unstable jets with wavenumbers nc − 1/(µk f ∗ L∗ ) (diamonds) and nc + 1/(µk f ∗ L∗ ) (squares) as a
function of supercriticality µ for four values of β . The dashed lines show the amplitude predicted by the G–L dynamics (cf. (29)), while the solid
as described in the text. Stable (unstable) equilibria are denoted with filled
lines show the amplitude predicted by the G–L dynamics with cex±
2
(empty) symbols and the vertical dotted lines show the stability boundary (58) obtained from the G–L dynamics (see section 7).

Appendix C. However, the regime β  1 is uninteresting anyway since the anisotropy in the dynamics in (1)
becomes vanishingly small and no zonal jets emerge.
The dependence of the amplitude R0 (0) on β can be
understood by considering the contribution of the various
wave components to c3 , in a similar manner as we did
for fr in (13). Thus, we write:
Z π/2

c3 =

√
F IG . 8. (a) The amplitude R0 (0) = 1/ c3 of the equilibrated most
unstable jet with wavenumber nc as a function of β . Dashed lines show
the β 1/3 and β 2/3 slopes for reference. (b) The coefficient c3 and its
1,2
decomposition into the contributions cec
3 and c3 as a function of β .
Coefficient c1,2
is
negative
for
4.9
/
β
/
79.
However,
for these values
3
ec and, therefore,
of c1,2
is
at
least
an
order
of
magnitude
less
than
c
3
3
negligible.

a discussion on how c3 , and consequently of the equilibration amplitude R0 (0), depends on β ; Fig. 8(a) shows
the amplitude of the most unstable jet, R0 (0), as a function of β . For β  1 the emerging jets have large scales
(nc  1) and equilibrate with amplitude that increases as
R0 ∼ β 1/3 . For β  1, the emerging jets have small scales
(nc ≈ 1) and their amplitude scales as R0 ∼ β 2/3 . The
scaling of R0 for β  1 is found to be robust feature independent of the spectral properties of the forcing (cf. Fig. 8
and Fig. C17). On the other hand for β  1 the amplitude R0 depends crucially on the forcing structure; see

0

FNL (ϑ ) dϑ ,

(32)

where FNL is the contribution to c3 from the four waves
with wavevectors k = (± cos ϑ , ± sin ϑ ). Figure 3 shows
the contributions FNL (ϑ ) for two values of β .
For β  1, all wave orientations contribute positively
to c3 . As a result, the up-gradient contributions to the
vorticity flux feedback F at small ϑ are counteracted
by FNL , while the down-gradient contributions to F at
higher ϑ are enhanced by FNL . This leads to a rapid
quenching of the instability and thus to a weak finite amplitude jet.
For large β , FNL has roughly the same dipole structure centered about an angle ϑ0 as the vorticity flux feedback F . Therefore, only waves with angles close to ϑ0
contribute appreciably to c3 . Waves with angles |ϑ |< ϑ0
give positive contributions to c3 , while waves with angles |ϑ |> ϑ0 give negative contributions to c3 . As a result, both the up-gradient and the down-gradient contributions to F are almost equally reduced and the instability
is only slowly hindered and is allowed to drive jets with
a much larger amplitude compared to β  1. To understand the power law increase of R(0) with β , note that as
β increases: (i) the heights of the dipole peaks grow linearly with β , (ii) the widths of the dipole peaks decrease as
β −2/3 , and (iii) the structure of dipole becomes more symmetric about ϑ0 . Figure 9(a) demonstrates points (i)-(iii).
Thus, each of the positive and the negative contribution to
c3 scale as β × β −2/3 = β 1/3 and their difference scales
with the derivative, i.e., as dβ 1/3 /dβ ∝ β −2/3 leading to
the increase of R(0) with β as β 1/3 .

12

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

contributions correspond to the two O(µ 3 ) possible interactions between the perturbed components of the mean
flow µ ū1 and µ 2 ū2 with the covariance corrections µC1 ,
µ 2C20 , µ 2C22 .
Coefficient
cec
3 ∝ − f (0 | ū1 ,C20 ) ,

(35)

is proportional to the mean vorticity flux feedback from
the interaction of µ ū1 with the homogeneous covariance
correction µ 2C20 to the equilibrium Ce . It measures the
compensation in the vorticity flux as perturbations lose energy to the mean flow.
Coefficient

F IG . 9. (a) The contribution FNL to the coefficient c3 from waves
at angle |ϑ | in the limit of β  1. FNL assumes a dipole pattern. The
amplitude of each of the dipole peaks scale with β and the widths of
the dipole structure scale with β −2/3 . For β  1 the structure of FNL
is independent of the type of forcing used. (b) The contribution from
waves at angle |ϑ | to the finite amplitude equilibrium jet, as given by
F − R20 FNL for three values of β .

Next we investigate how each of the forced waves contribute in sustaining the equilibrated state of the most unstable jet (ν = 0) with amplitude R0 (0) by decomposing the portion of the vorticity flux exceeding dissipation
which is the sum of fr and −c3 R0 (0)2 , into contributions
from various wave angles:
fr − c3 R0 (0)2 =

Z π/2 
0


F (ϑ ) − R20 FNL (ϑ ) dϑ . (33)

Figure 9(b) shows these contributions for three values
of β . For small values of β waves with angles |ϑ |< π/4
that drive the instability through their up-gradient contribution also support the equilibrated jet. However, for
β  1 this picture is reversed. The instability is driven by
waves with |ϑ |< ϑ0 (mainly from waves with |ϑ |≈ 0) and
is hindered by waves with angles |ϑ |> ϑ0 , while the equilibrated jet is supported through the up-gradient fluxes of
waves with angles |ϑ |> ϑ0 . The reason is the amplitude
R0 (0) is so large that the sign of the integrand in (33) is
reversed. Further investigation of the eddy–mean flow interactions leading to this peculiar feedback is out of the
scope of the current work and will be reported in a future
study.
Further insight into the equilibration dynamics is gained
by noting that the coefficient c3 can be written as the sum
of two separate contributions:
1,2
c3 = cec
3 + c3 ,

2inc (ya +yb )/2
c1,2
+ c.c.) − f (0 | ū2 ,C1 ) ,
3 ∝ − f (0 | ū1 ,C22 e
(36)
measures the mean vorticity flux feedbacks from the interaction of µ ū1 and µ 2 ū2 with the inhomogeneous covariance corrections µC1 and µ 2C22 e2inc (ya +yb )/2 to the equilibrium Ce . The exact form of the coefficients is given
in (B16) and (B18) respectively.
Figure 8(b) shows the contribution of the two processes
in c3 as a function of β . We observe that the main contribution to the coefficient c3 comes from cec
3 for most values
of β . Only for β  1 is there a contribution from c1,2
3 at
the same order.3 The same results also hold for the case of
the anisotropic forcing; see Fig. C17. Therefore, we conclude that for most values of β , the mean flow is stabilized
by the change in the homogeneous part of the covariance
due to conservation of the total energy that leads to a concomitant reduction of the up-gradient fluxes. For β  1
there is no change in the eddy–mean flow dynamical processes involved, while for β  1 the equilibrated flow is
supported by the up-gradient fluxes of the eddies that were
initially hindering its formation.

b. Equilibration processes for the upper-branch jets
We have seen in the discussion surrounding Fig. 6, that
the 2nc -components of the upper branch equilibria are
much stronger than the corresponding 2nc -components of
the lower branch jets. Therefore, we expect the interaction between the jet components with wavenumbers nc and
2nc to play an important role in the equilibration of the
upper-branch jets. This is not at all the case for the lower
branch G–L equilibria for which this interaction quantified
by c1,2
3 is sub-dominant compared to the energy correction
term cec
3 .
To investigate the interaction between the jet components with wavenumbers nc and 2nc , we impose a mean
flow with power only at those Fourier components:
ū = ūˆ1 einc y − ūˆ2 e2inc y + c.c. .

(37)

(34)

which represent different physical processes (details on
the decomposition can be found in Appendix B). These

3 Further analysis on the relative contributions of the forced eddies
on the for the two distinct processes can be found in Appendix B.

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

At low supercriticality there is a phase difference of 180◦
between the two components (see (22a) and the fact that
α2 < 0). Therefore, we impose the same phase difference
in (37). We then compute the vorticity fluxes which are
induced by the mean flow (37) by employing the adiabatic approximation, i.e., by assuming that the mean flow
evolves slow enough that it remains in equilibrium with
the eddy covariance and thus ∂t C ≈ 0. Such an adiabatic
approximation is exact for the fixed points of the S3T dynamics but it has also been proven adequate in qualitatively illuminating the eddy–mean flow dynamics away
from the homogeneous or inhomogeneous equilibria (Farrell and Ioannou 2003, 2007; Bakas and Ioannou 2013b;
Bakas et al. 2015). With the adiabatic approximation, the
Lyapunov equation (5b) simplifies to:
− L C + N (ūˆ1 einc y − ūˆ2 e2inc y + c.c,C) + εQ = 0 . (38)
We solve (38) for C, we compute the vorticity fluxes and
decompose them into their Fourier components:
υ 0ζ 0 =
fˆm nc (ūˆ1 , ūˆ2 )eimnc y + c.c. ,
|{z} ∑
m

(39)

=R(C)

with m positive integer. Then, from the mean flow equation (5a), we obtain that the mean flow components satisfy:
d ūˆ1
= fˆnc (ūˆ1 , ūˆ2 ) − ūˆ1 ,
dt
d ūˆ2
= fˆ2nc (ūˆ1 , ūˆ2 ) − ūˆ2 .
dt

(40a)
(40b)

Figure 10 shows the mean flow growth rates
(e.g., (1/ūˆ1 )d ūˆ1 /dt) as a function of the components ūˆ1
and ūˆ2 of the imposed mean flow. We see that for an infinitesimal mean flow (lower left corner of the two panes;
noted as region G–L), the growth of ūˆ1 resulting from
the linear instability and the growth of ūˆ2 resulting from
the second order self-interaction of the unstable mode
(c.f. (22a)) lead to an increase of both ūˆ1 and ūˆ2 . The
flow, thus, equilibrates at the point of intersection of the
zero contours for both mean flow tendencies (thick white
curves). This is the lower branch G–L equilibrium that is
shown by the open circle and was discussed in the previous section.
There exist, however, two additional points of intersection, both of which are accessible to the flow through
paths in the ūˆ1 –ūˆ2 parameter space. If we start with a
strong ūˆ1 ' 0.14 component from point A in the figure,
the large positive growth rate (1/ūˆ2 )d ūˆ2 /dt will lead to a
rapid increase of ūˆ2 , while the slightly negative tendency
(1/ūˆ1 )d ūˆ1 /dt will gradually weaken ūˆ1 so that ūˆ2 and ūˆ1
will move towards the right point of intersection. We perform an integration of the S3T dynamical system (5) with

13

initial conditions starting from point A. The path of the dynamical system in the ūˆ1 –ūˆ2 parameter space that is shown
by the dotted line, confirms the qualitative picture obtained
via the mean flow growth rates with the rapid increase of
ūˆ2 and the eventual equilibration at the right point of intersection shown by the filled triangle. Similarly, if we
start with a strong ūˆ2 ' 0.2 component from point B, the
strong growth (1/ūˆ1 )d ūˆ1 /dt and the weak negative tendency (1/ūˆ2 )d ūˆ2 /dt lead again to the equilibration of the
flow through the path shown in Fig. 10. The growth rates
close to the other point of intersection shown by the open
circle reveals that this corresponds to an unstable equilibrium and this is also confirmed through integrations of the
S3T system (5). These two points therefore correspond to
the stable and unstable equilibria of the upper branch that
are shown in Fig. 6.
The qualitative agreement between the approximate dynamics of (40) and the nonlinear S3T dynamics reveal that
it could be a useful tool for exploring the phase space of
the S3T system. For example, the bifurcation structure of
Fig. 6 could be obtained by plotting the adiabatic growth
rates. Figure 11 shows the curves of zero tendencies for
various values of the supercriticality. For low subcritical
values ε/εc < 0.89 (panel (a)), there is no point of intersection, therefore only the homogeneous equilibrium exists. For 0.89 ≤ ε/εc < 1 (panel b), there are two points
of intersection revealing the existence of the stable and the
unstable upper branch equilibria, while for 1 ≤ ε/εc (panel
(c)) there is the additional lower branch point. Finally,
for highly supercritical values (panel (d)) there is only one
point of intersection revealing the existence of the stable
upper branch equilibrium.
To shed light into the dynamics underlying these new
equilibration paths that lead to the upper-branch equilibria,
we decompose the covariance as a Fourier sum over the
inhomogeneous components
4

C = ∑ C̄ˆm (xa − xb ) eimnc (ya +yb )/2 .

(41)

m=0

The sum is over five components. The reason is that first
of all the flux feedback on ūˆ1 and ūˆ2 is generated by the nc
and 2nc components of the covariance. Inspection of the
nonlinear term in (38), reveals that only the homogeneous
component C̄ˆ0 as well as the covariance components at nc ,
2nc , 3nc and 4nc can interact with the mean flow (37) to
yield these two covariance components. We then decompose the vorticity fluxes as:
fˆnc (ūˆ1 , ūˆ2 ) = f1,0 + f1,2 + f2,3 ,
fˆ2nc (ūˆ1 , ūˆ2 ) = f2,0 + f1,1 + f1,3 + f2,4 .

(42a)
(42b)

Each of the terms on the right-hand-sides of (42) represents the different interactions among the mean flow components ūˆ1 , ūˆ2 with the covariance components C̄ˆ0 , C̄ˆ1 , C̄ˆ2 ,

14

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

F IG . 10. The mean flow growth rates (1/ūˆ1 )d ūˆ1 /dt (panel (a)) and (1/ūˆ2 )d ūˆ2 /dt (panel (b)) obtained under an adiabatic approximation
(∂t C = 0) for a mean flow ū = ūˆ1 einc y − ūˆ2 e2inc y as a function of ūˆ1 and ūˆ2 . The thick curves are the zero tendency contours (solid curve for the
d ūˆ1 /dt and dashed for d ūˆ2 /dt). Infinitesimal jet perturbations start in the region in the ūˆ1 –ūˆ2 phase space denoted as G–L and end up in the lower
branch equilibrium shown by the filled circle. The arrows denote paths in the ūˆ1 –ūˆ2 phase space that connect a finite amplitude jet perturbation
starting from points A and B and ending up to the upper branch equilibrium, denoted by the filled triangle. (The paths were obtained by timestepping the S3T system (5).) Panels (c)–(e) show the breakdown of the flux feedback fˆnc k f ∗ /ūˆ1 into the components (c) f1,0 /ūˆ1 , (d) f1,2 /ūˆ1 and
(e) f2,3 /ūˆ1 . Similarly, panels (f)–(i) show the breakdown of fˆ2nc k f ∗ /ūˆ2 into the components (f) f2,0 /ūˆ2 , (g) f1,1 /ūˆ2 , (h) f1,3 /ūˆ2 and (i) f2,4 /ūˆ2 .
Parameters used: β58 and supercriticality µ = 0.1.

F IG . 11. The locus of zero mean flow tendencies in ūˆ1 –ūˆ2 space for various supercriticalities for the case with β58 . Jet equilibria exist at the
intersection of the two loci, when d ūˆ1 /dt = d ūˆ2 /dt = 0. For (a) ε/εc = 0.84 there is no intersection as only the homogeneous equilibrium is stable
for ε/εc < 0.89 (see Fig. 6(a)). For (b) ε/εc = 0.99 there are two points of intersection that correspond to the stable and unstable upper branch
equilibria that exist for 0.89 < ε/εc < 1. For (c) ε/εc = 1.01 there are three equilibria: two upper-branch equilibria (a stable and an unstable) and
the lower-branch G–L equilibrium. For (d) ε/εc = 1.25 only one upper branch equilibrium exists as the G–L branch and the unstable upper branch
terminate at ε/εc = 1.068.

C̄ˆ3 and C̄ˆ4 . The first term in (42a) is proportional to the

homogeneous covariance component C̄ˆ0 :

vorticity flux feedback from the interaction of ūˆ1 with the



f1,0 ∝ f 0 | ūˆ1 einc y , C̄ˆ0 .

(43)

15

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

7. Eckhaus instability of the side band jets

For low supercriticality,

2
f1,0 − ūˆ1 ≈ A 1 − cec
3 |A| .

(44)

This means that f1,0 contains both the destabilizing feedback which drives the linear instability, and the stabilizing
feedback at finite amplitude that results from the energy
correction. The terms f1,2 and f2,3 in (42a) describe the
feedback of the nonlinear interaction between ūˆ1 and ūˆ2
on ūˆ1 :
f1,2 ∝ f (0 | ūˆ∗1 e−inc y , C̄ˆ2 e2inc (ya +yb )/2 )
+ f (0 | ūˆ2 e2inc y , C̄ˆ1∗ e−inc (ya +yb )/2 ) ,


f2,3 ∝ f 0 | ūˆ∗2 e−2inc y , C̄ˆ3 e3inc (ya +yb )/2 .

a. An intuitive view of the Eckhaus instability
(45)
(46)

For low supercriticality
2
f1,2 ≈ −c1,2
3 A|A| ,

(47)

while f2,3 is of higher order in µ. Similarly, the second
term on the right-hand-side of (42b) is proportional to the
vorticity flux feedback from the interaction of ūˆ2 with the
homogeneous covariance C̄ˆ0 :
f2,0 ∝ f (0 | ūˆ2 e2inc y , C̄ˆ0 ) .

In this section we study the stability of the sideband jet
equilibria. As noted by Parker and Krommes (2014), these
harmonic jet equilibria are susceptible to Eckhaus instability, a well known result for harmonic equilibria of the G–L
equation (Hoyle 2006). Here, we present the main results
of the Eckhaus instability and compare them with fully
nonlinear S3T dynamics.

(48)

For low supercriticality, the flux feedback above is positive but does not overcome friction, i.e., 0 < f2,0 < ūˆ2 .
Therefore, the homogeneous equilibrium is linearly stable
with respect to jet perturbations with wavenumber 2nc (as
expected). The terms f1,1 , f1,3 and f2,4 in (42b) describe
the feedback of the nonlinear interaction between ūˆ1 and
ūˆ2 on ūˆ2 :


(49)
f1,1 ∝ f 0 | ūˆ1 einc y , C̄ˆ1 einc (ya +yb )/2 ,


(50)
f1,3 ∝ f 0 | ūˆ∗1 e−inc y , C̄ˆ3 e3inc (ya +yb )/2


f2,4 ∝ f 0 | ūˆ∗1 e−2inc y , C̄ˆ4 e4inc (ya +yb )/2 .
(51)
For low supercriticality, f1,1 drives the ūˆ2 component of
the flow with an amplitude proportional to ūˆ21 and, therefore, ūˆ2 equilibrates at amplitude (22a), while f1,3 and f2,4
are of higher order. Panels (c)-(i) of Fig. 10 show the contribution of the various terms to the flux feedbacks fˆnc and
fˆ2nc respectively. In the G–L region the fluxes are determined by f0,1 , f0,2 and f1,1 . However, the “tongue” of positive tendency (1/ūˆ1 )d ūˆ1 /dt in Fig. 10(a) for large values
of ūˆ2 , as well as the region of very large positive tendency
(1/ūˆ1 )d ūˆ1 /dt in Fig. 10(b) are determined by the other
terms. As a result, the equilibration of the flow in the upper layer branch is due to the nonlinear interaction of the
two mean flow components ūˆ1 and ūˆ2 rather than the energy correction that underlies the equilibration of the flow
in the lower branch.

To obtain intuition for the eddy–mean flow dynamics
underlying the Eckhaus instability, note first that the G–L
dynamics are given by the balance between the vorticity flux feedback fr (ν) = fr (0) − c2 ν 2 , which provides
a diffusive correction to the original up-gradient fluxes
fr (0) > 0 at nc , and the stabilizing nonlinear term c3 |A|2 .
Let us assume an equilibrium jet with ν > 0, i.e. with a
scale smaller than that of the most unstable jet at nc , and
also assume a sinusoidal phase perturbation:
A(Y ) = R0 ei[νY +η sin(qY )]

with η  1 .

(52)

Figure 12 shows how the perturbed jet (52) is compressed
for half the wavelength of the phase perturbation π/q (unshaded region) and dilated for the other half (shaded region). In the compressed region the jet appears with an
enhanced wavenumber ν + δ ν while in the dilated region
the jet appears with a reduced wavenumber ν − δ ν. As
a result, the vorticity flux feedback fr (ν) is larger in the
dilated (shaded) region implying a tendency to enhance
the jet; the opposite occurs in the compressed region (nonshaded). Figure 12 shows a qualitative sketch of the mean
vorticity fluxes, υ 0 ζ 0 , that demonstrates this process. If
the nonlinear term does not counteract this mismatch, the
dilated part of the jet will grow and take over the whole
domain thus producing a jet with lower ν. (Similarly, for
an equilibrium jet with ν < 0 there is a tendency for the
compressed part of the jet to take over the whole domain
producing a jet with larger ν.)
To summarize, due to the diffusive nature of the vorticity flux feedback there is a tendency to go towards ν = 0
jets if not counteracted by the nonlinear eddy–mean flow
feedback.
b. A formal view of the Eckhaus instability
To address quantitatively the stability of the harmonic
jet equilibria (28), let us reformulate the G–L equation by
rewriting the jet amplitude A in polar form as:
A(Y, T ) = R(Y, T ) eiΘ(Y,T ) ,

(53)

where R is the amplitude and Θ is the phase of the jet. The
equilibrium jets have a constant amplitude R0 (ν) given
by (28) and a linearly varying phase Θ = νY . From (19),

16

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

and is shown in Fig. 13(b).
c. Comparison with S3T dynamics

F IG . 12. Solid curve shows a sinusoidal equilibrium jet ūe =
R0 cos [(nc + µν)y] with smaller scale (ν = nc ) compared to the scale of
the most unstable jet (we take µ = 1 so that the wavenumber differences
with the most unstable jet are exaggerated for illustration purposes).
Dashed curve shows the resulting jet when the phase of the equilibrium
jet ūe is perturbed: ū = R0 cos [(nc + µν)y + η sin(qy)], with q = ν and
η = 1/2 (for illustration purposes). This perturbation dilates the jet
in the shaded region and compresses the jet in the unshaded region.
Dash-dotted curve is a qualitative depiction of the expected vorticity
flux feedback υ 0 ζ 0 for the perturbed jet based on the dependence of fr
on the wavenumber ν.

p
such equilibria exist only for |ν|< νe = 1/c2 . Consider
now small perturbations about this equilibrium jet:
R = R0 (ν) + ρ̂ eiqY +λ T

and Θ = νY + φ̂ eiqY +λ T .
(54)
As shown in Appendix D, we have exponential growth of
these perturbations if
q2 + 2(νe2 − 3ν 2 ) < 0.

(55)

For an infinite domain the gravest mode has q = 0 and
therefore the jets
√with amplitude (53) are Eckhaus unstable
when |ν|> νe / 3. Maximum instability occurs for
p
3(ν/νe )4 + 2(ν/νe )2 − 1
|q|max = νe
,
(56)
2(ν/νe )
and therefore, the Eckhaus instability will form a jet of
wavenumber nc + µ(ν ± |q|max ). Figure 13(a) shows
the wavenumber |q|max as a function of the equilibrium jet wavenumber √
ν. Note that the equilibria with
wavenumbers ν ≈ νe / 3 are unstable to jets with neighboring wavenumbers as |q|max  1, while equilibria
with wavenumbers ν ≈ νe are unstable to the jet with
wavenumber nc as |q|max ≈ 1.
The growth rate for the most unstable structure with
|q|max is
(3ν 2 − νe2 )2
λmax =
.
(57)
4c1 νe2 ν 2

Compare first the stability analysis for the harmonic jets
derived in the weakly nonlinear limit of G–L dynamics
to nonlinear dynamics in the S3T system. Note that the
growth rate of the Eckhaus instability is much less than the
corresponding growth rate of the flow-forming instability
of the homogeneous state of a jet for almost all wavenumbers ν. Figure 13(b) compares the growth rate λmax for
the perturbation with |q|max that will eventually form a jet
with wavenumber nc + µ(ν ± |q|max ) to the growth rate
of the flow-forming instability of the homogeneous equilibrium that will form a jet with the same wavenumber
(shown with dashed line). As a result, the weak Eckhaus
instability manifests only in carefully contrived S3T simulations; any simulation of the S3T system (5) starting from
a random initial perturbation at low supercriticality will
evolve into the most unstable jet with wavenumber nc .
Second, in contrast with the infinite domain, for the
doubly periodic box the first side band jets appear when
def
ν ≥ ν ± , while the gravest wavenumber q is qmin =
1/(µk f ∗ L∗ ). Therefore, the instability criterion (55) is satisfied for
p
(3 − 1/2) c2
µ≤
.
(58)
k f ∗ L∗
We compare here the stability boundary (58) with the stability analysis based on the nonlinear S3T dynamics. The
stability of the inhomogeneous jet–turbulence S3T equilibria shown in Fig. 7 is studying using the numerical
methods developed by Constantinou (2015); Constantinou
et al. (2016); for the stability boundary (58) we use the
effective values cex±
for the side-band jet equilibria with
2
ν ± . Unstable (stable) equilibria are shown in Fig. 7 with
open (filled) symbols, while the stability boundaries for
ν ± are shown with the vertical dotted lines. For β6 , the
parabolic profile of the eigenvalue relation, on which the
Eckhaus instability calculations are based, remains accurate for larger supercriticalities and, therefore, the stability
boundary (58) consists a good approximation. For larger
and smaller values of β , the parabolic profile is not so accurate and, therefore, the criterion developed fails. For
example, for both β1 and β192 all the ν + jet equilibria are
unstable.
Last, we compare the development of the Eckhaus instability as predicted by the G–L dynamics (27) and as
predicted by the S3T dynamics. Figure 14 shows the evolution of the slightly perturbed n∗ = 5 (ν − ) and n∗ = 7
(ν + ) equilibria for β6 and supercriticality µ = 0.3 obtained from integrations of the S3T system (5). In both
cases, the equilibria are unstable to q = qmin perturbations.
As the instability develops the ūˆ(ky∗ = 6) component of
the flow grows exponentially (panels (c) and (d)) and the
flow moves into the stable n∗ = 6 (nc ) equilibrium jet by

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

17

8. Conclusion
1

0.75

0.5

0.25

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1

0.75

0.5

0.25

0

F IG . 13. (a) The most unstable wavenumber for the Eckhaus instability, |q|max /νe , as a function of the jet equilibrium wavenumber
√
ν/νe . Instability occurs in the shaded region for ν/νe > 1/ 3. (b)
The growth rate for the most Eckhaus unstable jet with q = qmax (57)
as a function of the jet equilibrium wavenumber ν (solid line). Also
shown with dashed line is the corresponding growth rate for the
flow-forming instability of the jet with wavenumber ν ± qmax that
will
eventually be formed
by the Eckhaus instability and is given by


1 − (ν ± qmax )2 /νe2 /c1 , according to the G–L equation (27).

branching or merging (panels (a) and (b)). We compute
the growth rate of the Eckhaus instability from (D4) by
substituting ν = q = 1/(µk f ∗ L∗ ) and using the effective
values cex±
2 :

λ± = µ

q
−1 + [(µ ex± /µ)2 − 1]2 + 4(µ ex± /µ)4
2
c1

. (59)

Panels (c) and (d) demonstrate that the growth rate obtained by (59) is in excellent agreement with the growth
rate of the Eckhaus instability in the nonlinear simulations.
Furthermore, the equilibrium jet amplitude is accurately
predicted by (29).
Figure 15 shows the comparison of the growth rates
for the other unstable sideband jet equilibria illustrated
in Fig. 7. We see once more that for β6 , for which the
parabolic approximation of the eigenvalue relation used
to obtain the G–L dynamics is accurate, the growth rates
agree for almost all the unstable range. For β1 and β192 ,
for which the parabolic profile is not accurate, there is in
general disagreement.

We examined the dynamics that underlies the formation and support of zonal jets at finite amplitude in forced–
dissipative barotropic beta-plane turbulence using the statistical state dynamics of the turbulent flow closed at
second-order. Within this framework, jet formation is
shown to arise as a flow-forming instability (or ‘zonostrophic instability’) of the homogeneous statistical equilibrium turbulent state when the non-dimensional param3
eter ε = ε∗ /(k−2
f ∗ r∗ ) crosses a certain critical threshold εc .
In this work, we studied the dynamics that govern the
equilibration of the flow-forming
instability in the limit of
p
small supercriticality µ = ε/εc − 1.
When supercriticality µ  1, the growth rate of the unstable modes as a function of the mean flow wavenumber
is to a good approximation a parabola. This allows a twotime, two-scale approximation of the nonlinear dynamics resulting in the weakly nonlinear Ginzburg–Landau
dynamics for the evolution of zonal jets. The equilibration of the flow-forming instability, was extensively investigated using the G–L dynamics. Also, the predictions
of the weakly nonlinear G–L dynamics regarding (i) the
amplitude of the equilibrated jets and (ii) their stability
were compared to the fully nonlinear S3T dynamics for
a wide range of values for the non-dimensional parameter
β = β∗ /(k f ∗ r∗ ).
According to G–L dynamics, the harmonic unstable
modes of the homogeneous equilibrium state equilibrate
at finite amplitude. The predicted amplitude of the jet that
results from the equilibration of the most unstable mode
with wavenumber nc , was compared to the amplitude of
the jet equilibria of the nonlinear S3T dynamics. For
β / 20, the jet amplitude was found to be accurately predicted by the G–L dynamics for up to µ ≈ 0.2. For β ' 20,
a new branch of jets with much larger amplitudes was discovered that was distinctly different from the G–L branch
of jet equilibria. The bifurcation diagram (e.g., Fig. 6)
exhibits a classic cusp bifurcation with hysteretic loops.
The new branch of jet equilibria exists even at subcritical
values of the flow-forming instability of the homogeneous
state (i.e., for ε < εc ). This has two consequences: first,
continuation methods for finding equilibria converge only
for small supercriticalities, as the jet equilibria transition
discontinuously to the upper branch (see, e.g., Fig. 6(a)).
This explains the failure to converge to equilibria reported
by Parker and Krommes (2014). Second, the cusp bifurcation allows the emergence of jets at subcritical parameter
values through a nonlinear flow-forming instability.
We compared the amplitudes of the jets that emerge
from the side-band jet-instabilities of the most unstable
mode of the flow-forming instability (i.e., the jets that
emerge at scales nc∗ ± 1/L∗ ). The amplitude predicted by
the G–L equation is partially based on the parabolic approximation to the dispersion relation and, more specifi-

18

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

F IG . 14. The equilibration of the Eckhaus instability under S3T dynamics. Panel (a) shows the evolution of the mean flow, ū∗ (y,t), for the
slightly perturbed n∗ = 5 (ν − ) equilibrium. Panel (c) shows the evolution of the n∗ = 6 Fourier component of the flow (solid). Also shown in panel
(b) are the growth rate predicted by (59) (dashed) and the amplitude of the n∗ = 6 jet as predicted by (29) (dash-dot). Panels (b) and (d) show the
same but for the slightly perturbed n∗ = 7 (ν + ) equilibrium. The planetary vorticity gradient is β6 and the supercriticality is µ = 0.3.

F IG . 15. Growth rate for the Eckhaus instability of the finite amplitude jets. Shown is the growth rate as a function of supercriticality µ for
three values of β obtained from the stability analysis for the equilibrium jets with wavenumbers nc − 1/(µk f ∗ L∗ ) (diamonds) and nc + 1/(µk f ∗ L∗ )
(squares) using the fully nonlinear system (5). Dashed curves show the growth rate as predicted from the G–L dynamics; Solid curves show the
growth rate (59) as predicted from the G–L dynamics using the modified values for c2 , while dashed curves show the unmodified growth rate (D4).

cally, on the curvature of the function of the growth rate at
criticality. This approximation was found to be valid away
from criticality only for non-dimensional β ≈ 5 and as a
result the predicted amplitude fails outside this range. We
propose a way to remedy this discrepancy (at least to some
extend) by using the exact values for the curvature of the
growth rate function for larger supercriticalities instead of
the curvature given by the parabolic approximation (see,
e.g., Fig. 14). With this modification, the side-band jet
amplitudes can be predicted by the G–L dynamics close to
their onset for β / 1 and for a wide range of supercriticalities for β ≈ 5. For β ' 20, apart from the G–L branch the
additional branch of higher amplitude side-band jets was
also found.
The physical and dynamical processes underlying the
equilibration of the flow-forming instability were then examined using three methods. The first was the decomposition of the nonlinear term in the G–L equation governing
the equilibration of the instability in two terms. One in-

volves the change in the homogeneous part of the eddy covariance that is required by total energy conservation. The
other involves the vorticity flux feedback resulting from
the interaction of the most unstable jet with wavenumber nc and the jet with the double harmonic 2nc that is inevitably generated by the nonlinear interactions. The second was the method of Bakas et al. (2015) for separating
the contributions of the various eddies in the induced vorticity fluxes: both for the linear term in the G–L equation
that drives the instability, and also for the nonlinear term
that stabilizes the flow. In this way, the eddies yielding upgradient fluxes and the eddies yield down-gradient fluxes
were identified along with the change in the up-gradient
or down-gradient character of the fluxes that occurs as the
jets grow. The third method was the development of a
reduced dynamical system that retains the fully nonlinear
interactions in contrast to the G–L equation. This reduced
system is based on an adiabatic assumption for the covariance changes and on a Galerkin truncation of the dynamics

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

retaining only the nc and 2nc components of the mean flow
that play important role in the equilibration of the zonostrophic instability.
For the G–L branch, the central physical process responsible for the equilibration is the reduction in the upgradient vorticity flux that occurs through the change in
the homogeneous part of the eddy covariance. For low
values of β , the instability is quickly quenched and the
jets equilibrate at low amplitude. The reason is that the
contribution of the eddies that induce up-gradient fluxes
and drive the instability is weakened as the jets emerge
while simultaneously the contribution of the eddies that
induce down–gradient fluxes is increased. As a result, the
jets equilibrate at a small amplitude and are supported by
the same eddies that drive the instability.
For large values of β , both the up-gradient and the
down-gradient contributions are almost equally weakened
thus leading to a slow decay of the growth rate and to an
equilibrated jet with a much larger amplitude. Because
the equilibrium amplitude is large, the stabilizing fluxes
that are multiplied by the square of the jet amplitude in the
G–L equation are dominant and, therefore, at equilibrium
the jet is supported by the eddies that were initially hindering its growth (these eddies have phase lines that form
small angles with the meridional but different than zero).
For the new branch of jet equilibria the main physical
process responsible for the equilibration is the interaction
of the nc and the 2nc component of the emerging flow.
Starting from a finite amplitude jet with either strong nc or
2nc components, this nonlinear interaction leads to rapid
growth of the jet and to equilibration of the flow at amplitudes much larger than the G–L branch and with much
stronger 2nc component.
Finally, the stability of the equilibrated side band unstable jet perturbations was examined. For an infinite domain, zonal jets with scales close to the scale nc of the
most unstable mode of the flow-forming instability are stable; jets with scales much larger or much smaller are unstable. The incipient Eckhaus instability of the harmonic
equilibria of the G–L equation is well studied within the
literature of pattern formation but here it was interpreted
in a physically intuitive way. The equilibrated jets have
a low amplitude (proportional to the supercriticality) and
therefore do not significantly change the structure of the
turbulence. As a result, a mean flow perturbation on the
turbulent flow induces approximately the same vorticity
flux feedback as in the absence of any jet with the vorticity flux feedback having a maximum at the most unstable wavenumber. Therefore, when a dilation–compression
phase perturbation is inserted in the equilibrated jet that
has a different wavenumber than nc , the vorticity flux feedback for the dilated or the compressed part of the jet will
be larger and this part of the jet tends to grow and take
over the whole domain.

19

The predictions for the stability boundary and the
growth rate of the Eckhaus instability were then compared
to the stability analysis of the jet equilibria using the fully
nonlinear S3T system and the methods developed in Constantinou (2015). For β ≈ 5, using the exact values for
the curvature of the growth rate function yields accurate
predictions for both the stability boundary and the growth
rate. As the instability develops the unstable side band jets
with smaller/larger scale than the jet with wavenumber nc
branch/merge into the stable nc jet. For low or high values
of β , large quantitative discrepancies occur with a few exceptions, but the qualitative picture of the dynamics with
branching/merging into the stable jet equilibrium remains.
We note that the comparison of the G-L dynamics with
nonlinear S3T integrations, as well as investigation of
the equilibration process with an anisotropic ring forcing
showed that the results in this study are not sensitive to the
forcing structure.
A question that rises naturally is whether the results discussed here are relevant for strong turbulent jets. Strong
turbulent jets also undergo bifurcations as the turbulence
intensity increases. There are, however, qualitative differences compared to weak jets: strong jets always merge to
larger scales while weak jets can either merge or branch
to reach a scale close to nc . Based on the relevant dynamics in pattern formation, we expect that the anti-diffusive
phase dynamics that are involved in the Eckhaus instability will play a significant role in the secondary instabilities
of large-amplitude jets as well. Moreover, the generalization of the Ginzburg–Landau dynamics that we have put
forward in this study (eqs. (40)) is able to describe the slow
evolution of a jet that consists of more than just one harmonic. This generalization of the Ginzburg–Landau dynamics, we hope, will provide a vehicle for understanding the dynamics involving bifurcations of strong turbulent jets.

Acknowledgments. The authors would like to thank
Jeffrey B. Parker for helpful comments on the first version of the manuscript. N.A.B. was supported by the
AXA Research Fund. N.C.C. was partially supported by
the NOAA Climate and Global Change Postdoctoral Fellowship Program, administered by UCAR’s Cooperative
Programs for the Advancement of Earth System Sciences
and also by the National Science Foundation under Award
OCE-1357047.

20

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

APPENDIX A
S3T formulation and eigenvalue relation of the flow-forming instability
In this appendix we derive the eigenvalue relation of the flow-forming instability. The eigenvalue relation was first
derived by Srinivasan and Young (2012). Here, we repeat the derivation mainly to introduce some notation and terminology that will prove to be helpful in understanding the nonlinear equilibration of the flow-forming instability.
Consider the S3T system (5), where

def
−1
L = β ∂xa ∆−1
+2 ,
a + ∂xb ∆b

(A1)

is the operator governing the linear eddy dynamics,

def 
−1
2
N (ū,C) = −ūa ∂xa + (∂y2a ūa ) ∂xa ∆−1
a − ūb ∂xb + (∂yb ūb ) ∂xb ∆b C ,

(A2)

is the nonlinear operator governing the eddy–mean flow interaction and
def 1 

R(C) =

2

 
−1
∂xa ∆−1
C a=b ,
a + ∂xb ∆b

(A3)

is the eddy vorticity flux driving the mean flow. Subscripts a or b on operators acting on C indicate the point of evaluation
and the specific independent variable the operator is acting on, and the subscript a = b indicates that the function of xa
and xb , e.g., inside the square brackets on the right-hand-side of (A3), is transformed into a function of a single variable
by setting xa = xb = x.
The eigenvalue relation is obtained by linearizing the S3T system (5) about the homogeneous equilibrium (8). Then,
introducing the ansantz (9) in the linearized S3T equations we obtain:
(σ + 1)δ ū = R(δC) ,
(σ + L )δC = N (δ ū,Ce ) .

(A4a)
(A4b)

h
i
def
f (σ |δ ū,C) = R (σ + L )−1 N (δ ū,C) ,

(A5)

The quantity:

is the vorticity flux induced by the distortion of the incoherent homogeneous eddy equilibrium field with covariance C
by the mean flow δ ū.
(h)
The inversion of the operators and the algebra is simplified by taking the Fourier decomposition of C̃n :
(h)
C̃n (xa − xb ) =

Z

d2k
Ĉ(k) eik·(xa −xb ) .
(2π)2

(A6)

By inserting (A6) and (8) into (A4b) we obtain:


δC = ε ein(ya +yb )/2 G+ (σ , xa − xb ) − G− (σ |xa − xb ) ,

(A7)

where we defined
def

G± (σ |x) =

Z

2 (k2 − n2 )
ikx k∓
d2k
Q̂(k± ) ik·x
±
e
,
2 k2 + 2iβ nk k
2
(2π) (σ + 2)k+
2
x y
−

(A8)

with k± = k + n/2, n = (0, n) and k± = |k± |. Inserting (A7) in (A4a) we obtain (10), in which
Z

f=

nkx2 (ky + n/2) (1 − n2 /k2 )
d2k
Q̂(k) ,
(2π)2 (σ + 2)k2 ks2 + 2iβ nkx (ky + n/2)

(A9)

def

with ks = |k + n|. After substituting the ring forcing power spectrum (4), expressing the integrand in polar coordinates
(kx , ky ) = (k cos ϑ , k sin ϑ ) and integrating over k (A9) becomes:
Z 2π

f=
0

N f dθ
,
(σ + 2)D f + iβ Dβ

(A10)

21

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

with N f (θ ) = n cos2 θ (sin ϑ + n/2)(1 − n2 )/π, D f (ϑ ) = cos2 ϑ + (sin ϑ + n)2 and Dβ (ϑ ) = 2n cos ϑ (sin ϑ + n/2). At
criticality (σ = 0), using the mirror symmetry property of the forcing, i.e., Q̂(−kx , ky ) = Q̂(kx , ky ), the vorticity flux
feedback is rewritten as:
Z
π/2

F (ϑ , n) dϑ ,

(A11)

N f (ϑ ) D f (ϑ )
N f (ϑ + π) D f (ϑ + π)
+
,
4D2f (ϑ ) + β 2 D2β (ϑ ) 4D2f (ϑ + π) + β 2 D2β (ϑ + π)

(A12)

fr =
where
F (ϑ , n) =

0

is the contribution to the feedback from the waves with wavevectors (kx , ky ), (−kx , −ky ) and their mirror symmetric
wavevectors (−kx , ky ) and (kx , −ky ) respectively.
APPENDIX B
Ginzburg–Landau equation for the weakly nonlinear evolution of a zonal jet perturbation about the
homogeneous state
To obtain the G–L equation governing the nonlinear S3T dynamics near the onset of the instability, we assume that
the energy input rate is slightly supercritical ε = εc (1 + µ 2 ), where µ  1 measures the supercriticality. As discussed in
section 4, the emerging jet grows slowly at a rate O(µ 2 ) and contains a band of wavenumbers of O(µ) around nc , where
nc is the wavenumber of the jet that achieves neutrality at εc . Therefore, we assume that the dynamics evolve on a slow
time scale T = µ 2t and are modulated at a long meridional scale Y = µy. The leading order jet is ū1 = A(Y, T ) einc y . We
then expand the velocity and the covariance as a series in µ:
ū = µ ū1 (y,Y, T ) + µ 2 ū2 (y,Y, T ) + O(µ 3 ) ,
e

(B1a)
2

3

C = C (xa − xb ) + µ C1 (xa − xb ,Ya ,Yb , T ) + µ C2 (xa − xb ,Ya ,Yb , T ) + O(µ ) ,

(B1b)

along with the linear and nonlinear operators L and N that depend on the fast and slow meridional coordinates, y
and Y respectively.
We substitute (B1) in (5) and collect terms with equal powers of µ. As discussed in section 4, we further assume that
the amplitude A, as well as C1 and C2 , are independent of the slow coordinate Y . This way operators L and N also
become independent of Y . In this case, the order µ 0 terms yield the homogeneous equilibrium. Terms of order µ 1 yield
the balance:
  

ū1 def
ū1 − R(C1 )
A
=
=0,
(B2)
C1
L C1 − N (ū1 ,Ce )
which can also be compactly written as
ū1 = εc f (0|ū1 , Q/2) ,

(B3)

where f (σ |ū1 , Q/2) is the vorticity flux feedback on the mean flow ū1 as defined in (A5). The solution of (B3) is the
eigenfunction of operator A with zero eigenvalue:

 

einc y
ū1


= A(T )
+ c.c. .
(B4)
−
C1
εc einc (ya +yb )/2 G+
c (0|xa − xb ) − Gc (0|xa − xb )
In (B4) the subscript c on G± denotes that they are evaluated at n = nc . At order µ 2 the balance is:
  

ū2
0
A
=
.
C2
N (ū1 ,C1 ) + εc Q

(B5)

Equation (B5) has a homogeneous solution which is proportional to [ū1 ,C1 ]T and can be incorporated in it, and a particular solution. The nonlinear term N (ū1 ,C1 ) generates both a double and a zero harmonic mean flow (and covariance).
As a result, the particular solution is:
  
 

α2 A(T )2 e2inc y
ū2
0
=
+
+ c.c. ,
(B6)
C2
εc Q(xa − xb )/2 +C20 (xa − xb , T )
C22 (xa − xb , T ) e2inc (ya +yb )/2

22

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

where C20 and C22 are the zero and double harmonic coefficients of the covariance and
(
)
Z
ky,2 (k22 − n2c )
ky k22 (k2 − n2c )
d 2 k inc kx3 (k2 − n2c )
εc
−
Q̂(k)
2 k2 + 2iβ n k k )
2
(2π)2 k2 k22 + iβ nc kx ky,1 k2 k42 + 2iβ nc kx ky,2 k2 (k−2
c x y
2
def
α2 =
,
Z
d 2 k nc kx2 ky,2 (k2 − 4n2c )
εc
Q̂(
k
)
−
1
(2π)2 k2 (k2 k42 + 2iβ nc kx ky,2 )
def

(B7)

def

with ky, j = ky + jnc /2 and k2j = kx2 + ky,2 j for any integer j.
At order µ 3 the balance is:
  

ū3
−∂T ū1
A
=
.
C3
−∂T C1 + N (ū2 ,C1 ) + N (ū1 ,C2 )

(B8)

If the right-hand-side of (B8) is an eigenvector of operator A with zero eigenvalue then secular terms appear that
produce a mean flow and an associated covariance that are unbounded at |y|→ ∞. This occurs when

− ∂T ū1 + R L −1 [−∂T C1 + N (ū2 ,C1 ) + N (ū1 ,C2 )]
(B9)
has a non-zero einc y component. The secular terms vanish if:
h
i

∂T ū1 + R L −1 ∂T C1 = f (0 | ū1 ,Ce ) + f (0 | ū1 ,C20 ) + P1 f (0|ū1 ,C22 e2inc (ya +yb )/2 + c.c.) + f (0|ū2 ,C1 ) .

(B10)

where P1 is the operator that projects onto the harmonic nc :
def

P1 g(y) =

Z

g(s) einc (y−s) ds .

(B11)

∞

Equation (B10) determines the equilibration of the most unstable jet. The terms on the right-hand-side of (B10) are
nonlinear in ū and C and they are responsible for the equilibration of the SSD instability. Let us take a closer look into
each term in (B10). The second term on the left-hand-side of (B10) is:

R L −1 ∂T C1 = (∂T A) (c1 − 1) einc y ,
(B12)
where
c1 = 1 +

εc
4

Z

d 2 k nc kx2 ky,1 k22 (k2 − n2c )
Q̂(k) .
(2π)2 (k2 k22 + iβ nc kx ky,1 )2

(B13)

The first term on the right-hand-side of (B10) is the vorticity flux feedback on ū1 at criticality
f (0|ū1 ,Ce ) = A einc y .

(B14)

The second term on the right-hand-side of (B10) is the vorticity flux feedback between the order µ 1 mean jet ū1 , and
the homogeneous order µ 2 eddy covariance C20 :
2 inc y
f (0|ū1 ,C20 ) = −cec
,
3 A|A| e

(B15)

with
"
#
2ky,1
ky,−1
ky,3
d 2 k nc kx4 k22 (k22 − n2c )(k2 − n2c )2
−
− 2 2
Q̂(k) .
2 + iβ n k k
4
(2π)2
|k2 k22 + iβ nc kx ky,1 |2
k2 k22 + iβ nc kx ky,1 k2 k−2
k2 k4 + iβ nc kx ky,3
c x y,−1
(B16)
The third term on the right-hand-side of (B10) is the einc y component of the vorticity flux feedback between the jet ū1 ,
with wavenumber nc and the jet ū2 with wavenumber 2nc with the inhomogeneous eddy covariance C1 and C22 :
h
i
2 inc y
P1 f (0|ū1 ,C22 e2inc (ya +yb )/2 + c.c.) + f (0|ū2 ,C1 ) = −c1,2
,
(B17)
3 A|A| e
def εc
cec
3 =

Z

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

23

F IG . B16. The contribution of the two feedbacks Fec (solid) and F1,2 (dashed) to the nonlinear coefficient FNL . Panel (a) shows the case with
β = 0.1 while panel (b) with β = 100.

with
(



ky,1 (k42 − n2c )
ky,3 k42 (k2 − n2c )
n k4 k2 (k2 − n2c )(k22 − n2c )
 2 c x
 2

−
8
k2 k4 + 2iβ nc kx ky,2 k2 k2 + iβ nc kx ky,1 k2 k22 + iβ nc kx ky,1 k2 (k22 k42 + iβ nc kx ky,3 )
)
2 − n2 )(k2 − n2 )2 (k2 k2 + iβ n k k )
nc kx4 ky,1 k22 (k−2
c x y
c
c
−2 2
+ 2 2
Q̂(k)
2 2
2 + iβ n k k
(k k2 + iβ nc kx ky,1 )2 (k2 k−2
c x y,−1 )(k−2 k2 + 2iβ nc kx ky )
(


Z
ky,1 (k42 − n2c )
ky,3 k42 (k2 − n2c )
εc
d2k
k2 − 4n2c
+ i a2
−
4
(2π)2 k2 k42 + 2iβ nc kx ky,2 k2 k22 + iβ nc kx ky,1 k2 (k22 k42 + iβ nc kx ky,3 )
#)
"
ky,3 k22 (k2 − 4n2c )
ky,−1 (k22 − 4n2c )
k2 − n2c
− 2 2 2
nc kx3 Q̂(k) .
(B18)
+ 2 2
2 + iβ n k k
k k2 − iβ nc kx ky,1 k2 k−2
k (k2 k4 + iβ nc kx ky,3 )
c x y,−1

def εc
c1,2
3 =

Z

d2k
(2π)2

Therefore, using (B12), (B14), (B15) and (B17) we get that (B10) reduces to:
c1 ∂T A = A − c3 A|A|2 ,

(B19)

def

1,2
where c3 = cec
3 + c3 .
Finally, we arrive to the G–L equation (27) by adding the diffusion term c2 ∂Y2 A on the right-hand-side of (B19), with


∂2 f
∂ n2 nc ,σ =0
"
#
Z
2 2 2 2
2
2
nc kx2 ky,1
εc
d 2 k kx ky,2 k (k − nc )(2k + iβ kx ) kx2 k2 (k2 − 4nc ky − 5n2c )
=
−
+ 2 2 2
Q̂(k) .
2
(2π)2
(k2 k22 + iβ nc kx ky,1 )3
2(k2 k22 + iβ nc kx ky,1 )2
k (k k2 + iβ nc kx ky,1 )

εc
c2 = −
2
def



(B20)

The coefficients c1 , c2 and c3 are all functions of β , nc and the forcing covariance spectrum, Q̂. For the ring forcing (4)
considered here they are all real and positive.
To study the contribution to each of the components of c3 from the forced waves with phase lines forming an angle ϑ
with the y-axis, we substitute the ring forcing power spectrum (4). After expressing the integrand in polar coordinates
(kx , ky ) = (k cos ϑ , k sin ϑ ) and integrate over k we obtain:
1,2
[ cec
3 , c3 , c3 ] = εc

Z π/2
0

[Fec , F1,2 , FNL ] dϑ ,

(B21)

where Fec , F1,2 , and FNL is the contribution of the waves with (kx , ky ), (−kx , −ky ) and their mirror symmetric (−kx , ky )
and (kx , −ky ) to the feedbacks and FNL = Fec + F1,2 . Figure B16 shows these contributions as a function of wave
angle. For β  1, forced eddies at all angles contribute positively to both Fec and F1,2 . The eddies tend to reduce
the positive destabilizing contribution F > 0 at small angles mainly through F1,2 , while they enhance the negative
stabilizing contribution F < 0 at large angles mainly through Fec . For β  1, the dominant contribution comes from
Fec and it follows roughly the same pattern as F . That is, due to the reduction in their energy the eddies tend to

24

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

reduce both the up-gradient vorticity fluxes of waves with angles |ϑ |/ ϑ0 and the down-gradient fluxes of waves with
phase lines at angles |ϑ |' ϑ0 with the latter reduction being larger. As a result, the nonlinear feedback of eddies with
phase lines at angles |ϑ |' ϑ0 is to enhance the jet and, as discussed in section 4, these are the eddies that support the
equilibrated jet.
APPENDIX C
Non-isotropic ring forcing
Here we briefly discuss the effect of the forcing anisotropy on the obtained results. Consider the generalization of
forcing (4) with spectrum:
Q̂∗ (k∗ ) = 4π k f ∗ δ (k∗ − k f ∗ ) [1 + γ cos(2ϑ )] ,
(C1)
def

where ϑ = arctan(ky∗ /kx∗ ) and |γ|≤ 1 so that Q̂∗ ≥ 0. Parameter γ determines the degree of anisotropy of the forcing (Srinivasan and Young 2014; Bakas et al. 2015). The isotropic case of (4) is recovered for γ = 0. For example, for
γ = 1 we get an anisotropic forcing that favors structures with small |ky∗ | (i.e., favoring structures like that in Fig. 2(a)
compared to structures like that in Fig. 2(b)), as if the vorticity injection was due to baroclinic growth processes. All
three coefficients c1 , c2 , and c3 in (27) are real and positive for forcing (C1).
We first note that we obtain similar results to the isotropic forcing case regarding the comparison of the G-L predictions to the fully nonlinear dynamics (not shown). That is, both the existence of the upper branch equilibria, as well as
the relative quantitative success of the G-L dynamics (after the proposed modifications) in predicting the amplitude and
instability of the equilibrated jets are insensitive to forcing structure.
Regarding the physical processes underlying the equilibration of the jets, we show in Fig. C17(a) the amplitude R0
for the equilibrated most unstable jet as a function of β . For β  1, the amplitude has the same power law as in the
isotropic forcing case shown in Fig. 8(a). However, the amplitude shows different dependence with β for β  1 but,
however, this regime is of no interest since for as β → 0 no zonal jets emerge in (1) anyway. The relative contribution of
the eddy-correction term and the interaction of nc with the double harmonic jet in c3 is shown in Fig. C17(b). Similarly
to the isotropic forcing case, for most values of β the equilibration is dominated by the interaction of the most unstable
jet with the homogeneous covariance correction.
Lastly, we note that for anisotropic forcing similar qualitative decomposition of c3 from various waves (as in Fig. 9)
also occurs (not shown).
APPENDIX D
Eckhaus stability of G–L dynamics
To address the Eckhaus instability of the harmonic jet equilibria, we rewrite the jet amplitude A in polar form (53),
we then substitute into (27) and separate real and imaginary parts to obtain:


c1 ∂T R = 1 + c2 ∂Y2 − c2 (∂Y Θ)2 R − c3 R3 ,
(D1a)
c1 R∂T Θ = 2c2 (∂Y R)(∂Y Θ) + c2 R∂Y2 Θ .

(D1b)

Assume now an equilibrium jet with constant amplitude R0 (ν) and a linearly varying phase Θ = νY . Consider small
perturbations about this equilibrium jet:
R = R0 (ν) + ρ

and

Θ = νY + φ ,

(D2)

and linearize (D1) to obtain:


c1 ∂T ρ = 1 + c2 (∂Y2 − ν 2 ) − 3c3 R20 ρ − 2c2 R0 ν∂Y φ ,
c1 R0 ∂T φ = 2c2 ν∂Y ρ + c2 R0 ∂Y2 φ .
Using the ansatz [ρ, φ ] = [ρ̂, φ̂ ] eiqY +λ T we find that the eigenvalues λ are:
p
ν 2 − νe2 − q2 ± (ν 2 − νe2 )2 + 4q2 ν 2
.
λ=
c1 νe2

(D3a)
(D3b)

(D4)

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

25

√
F IG . C17. Same as Fig. 8 but for anisotropic forcing with γ = 1. (a) The amplitude R0 (0) = 1/ c3 of the equilibrated most unstable jet with
wavenumber nc as a function of β for the case with isotropic (γ = 0) and anisotropic (γ = 1) forcing. Dashed line show the β 1/3 slope for reference.
1,2
(b) The coefficient c3 and its decomposition into the contributions cec
3 and c3 as a function of β .

Instability occurs when λ > 0, that is when
q2 + 2(νe2 − 3ν 2 ) < 0.

(D5)

26

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES

References
Ait-Chaalal, F., T. Schneider, B. Meyer, and J. B. Marston, 2016: Cumulant expansions for atmospheric flows. New. J. Phys., 18 (2), 025 019,
doi:10.1088/1367-2630/18/2/025019.
Bakas, N. A., N. C. Constantinou, and P. J. Ioannou, 2015: S3T stability of the homogeneous state of barotropic beta-plane turbulence. J.
Atmos. Sci., 72 (5), 1689–1712, doi:10.1175/JAS-D-14-0213.1.
Bakas, N. A., and P. J. Ioannou, 2013a: Emergence of large scale structure in barotropic β -plane turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett., 110, 224 501,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.224501.
Bakas, N. A., and P. J. Ioannou, 2013b: On the mechanism underlying
the spontaneous emergence of barotropic zonal jets. J. Atmos. Sci.,
70 (7), 2251–2271, doi:10.1175/JAS-D-12-0102.1.
Bakas, N. A., and P. J. Ioannou, 2014: A theory for the emergence
of coherent structures in beta-plane turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 740,
312–341, doi:10.1017/jfm.2013.663.
Bakas, N. A., and P. J. Ioannou, 2018: Is spontaneous generation
of coherent baroclinic flows possible? J. Fluid Mech., (in review,
arXiv:1712.05724).
Bakas, N. A., and P. J. Ioannou, 2019: Emergence of non-zonal coherent
structures. Zonal jets, B. Galperin, and P. L. Read, Eds., Cambridge
University Press, chap. 27, (arXiv:1501.05280).

Cross, M., and H. Greenside, 2009: Pattern formation and dynamics in
nonequilibrium systems. Cambridge University Press, 552 pp.
Danilov, S., and D. Gurarie, 2004: Scaling, spectra and zonal
jets in beta-plane turbulence. Phys. Fluids, 16, 2592–2603,
doi:10.1063/1.1752928.
Farrell, B. F., and P. J. Ioannou, 2003: Structural stability of turbulent jets. J. Atmos. Sci., 60, 2101–2118, doi:10.1175/15200469(2003)060<2101:SSOTJ>2.0.CO;2.
Farrell, B. F., and P. J. Ioannou, 2007: Structure and spacing
of jets in barotropic turbulence. J. Atmos. Sci., 64, 3652–3665,
doi:10.1175/JAS4016.1.
Farrell, B. F., and P. J. Ioannou, 2009: Emergence of jets from turbulence in the shallow-water equations on an equatorial beta plane. J.
Atmos. Sci., 66, 3197–3207, doi:10.1175/2009JAS2941.1.
Farrell, B. F., and P. J. Ioannou, 2017: Statistical state dynamics based theory for the formation and equilibration of
Saturn’s north polar jet. Phys. Rev. Fluids, 2 (7), 073 801,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevFluids.2.073801.
Farrell, B. F., P. J. Ioannou, J. Jiménez, N. C. Constantinou, A. LozanoDurán, and M.-A. Nikolaidis, 2016: A statistical state dynamicsbased study of the structure and mechanism of large-scale motions in plane Poiseuille flow. J. Fluid Mech., 809, 290–315,
doi:10.1017/jfm.2016.661.

Bouchet, F., C. Nardini, and T. Tangarife, 2013: Kinetic theory of jet dynamics in the stochastic barotropic and 2D Navier-Stokes equations.
J. Stat. Phys., 153 (4), 572–625, doi:10.1007/s10955-013-0828-3.

Farrell, B. F., P. J. Ioannou, and M. A. Nikolaidis, 2017: Instability of the roll–streak structure induced by background turbulence
in pretransitional Couette flow. Phys. Rev. Fluids, 2 (3), 034 607,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevFluids.2.034607.

Bouchet, F., J. Rolland, and E. Simonnet, 2018: A rare event algorithm
links transitions in turbulent flows with activated nucleations. (submitted, arXiv:1810.11057).

Fitzgerald, J. G., and B. F. Farrell, 2018a: Statistical State Dynamics of
vertically sheared horizontal flows in two-dimensional stratified turbulence. J. Fluid Mech., 854, 544–590, doi:10.1017/jfm.2018.560.

Chen, S., R. E. Ecke, G. L. Eyink, M. Rivera, M. Wan, and
Z. Xiao, 2006: Physical mechanism of the two-dimensional
inverse energy cascade. Phys. Rev. Lett., 96, 084 502,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.96.084502.

Fitzgerald, J. G., and B. F. Farrell, 2018b: Vertically sheared horizontal flow-forming instability in stratified turbulence: Analytical linear
stability analysis of Statistical State Dynamics equilibria. J. Atmos.
Sci., doi:10.1175/JAS-D-18-0075.1, in press.

Constantinou, N. C., 2015: Formation of large-scale structures
by turbulence in rotating planets. Ph.D. thesis, National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, URL http://www.
didaktorika.gr/eadd/handle/10442/35501?locale=en, (also available
at arXiv:1503.07644).

Frishman, A., and C. Herbert, 2018: Turbulence statistics in
a 2D vortex condensate. Phys. Rev. Lett., 120, 204 505,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.120.204505.

Constantinou, N. C., B. F. Farrell, and P. J. Ioannou, 2014a: Emergence
and equilibration of jets in beta-plane turbulence: applications of
Stochastic Structural Stability Theory. J. Atmos. Sci., 71 (5), 1818–
1842, doi:10.1175/JAS-D-13-076.1.
Constantinou, N. C., B. F. Farrell, and P. J. Ioannou, 2016: Statistical state dynamics of jet–wave coexistence in barotropic beta-plane
turbulence. J. Atmos. Sci., 73 (5), 2229–2253, doi:10.1175/JAS-D15-0288.1.
Constantinou, N. C., A. Lozano-Durán, M.-A. Nikolaidis, B. F. Farrell, P. J. Ioannou, and J. Jiménez, 2014b: Turbulence in the
highly restricted dynamics of a closure at second order: comparison with DNS. J. Phys. Conf. Ser., 506, 012 004, doi:10.1088/17426596/506/1/012004.
Constantinou, N. C., and J. B. Parker, 2018: Magnetic suppression of zonal flows on a beta plane. Astrophys. J., 863 (1), 46,
doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aace53.

Frishman, A., J. Laurie, and G. Falkovich, 2017: Jets or vortices – what
flows are generated by an inverse turbulent cascade? Phys. Rev. Fluids, 2, 032 602, doi:10.1103/PhysRevFluids.2.032602.
Holloway, G., 2010: Eddy stress and shear in 2-D flows. J. Turbul., 11,
N14, doi:10.1080/14685248.2010.481673.
Hoyle, R., 2006: Pattern formation: An introduction to methods. Cambridge University Press.
Huang, H.-P., and W. A. Robinson, 1998: Two-dimensional
turbulence and persistent zonal jets in a global barotropic
model. J. Atmos. Sci., 55, 611–632, doi:10.1175/15200469(1998)055<0611:TDTAPZ>2.0.CO;2.
Ingersoll, A. P., 1990: Atmospheric dynamics of the outer planets. Science, 248, 308–315, doi:10.1126/science.248.4953.308.
Ingersoll, A. P., and Coauthors, 2004: Dynamics of Jupiter’s atmosphere. Jupiter: the planet, satellites, and magnetosphere, F. Bagenal, T. E. Dowling, and W. B. McKinnon, Eds., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 105–128.

JOURNAL OF THE ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES
Kraichnan, R. H., 1976: Eddy viscosity in two and three dimensions. J. Atmos. Sci., 33 (8), 1521–1536, doi:10.1175/15200469(1976)033<1521:EVITAT>2.0.CO;2.
Manfroi, A. J., and W. R. Young, 1999: Slow evolution of zonal jets
on the beta plane. J. Atmos. Sci., 56, 784–800, doi:10.1175/15200469(1999)056<0784:SEOZJO>2.0.CO;2.
Marston, J. B., G. P. Chini, and S. M. Tobias, 2016: Generalized quasilinear approximation: Application to zonal jets. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
116 (21), 214 501 EP –5, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.214501.
Marston, J. B., E. Conover, and T. Schneider, 2008: Statistics of an
unstable barotropic jet from a cumulant expansion. J. Atmos. Sci.,
65 (6), 1955–1966, doi:10.1175/2007JAS2510.1.
Marston, J. B., W. Qi, and S. M. Tobias, 2014: Direct statistical
simulation of a jet. Zonal jets: Phenomenology, genesis, physics,
B. Galperin, and P. L. Read, Eds., Cambridge University Press,
chap. 5, (submitted, arXiv:1412.0381).
Parker, J. B., and J. A. Krommes, 2013: Zonal flow as pattern formation.
Phys. Plasmas, 20, 100 703, doi:10.1063/1.4828717.
Parker, J. B., and J. A. Krommes, 2014: Generation of zonal flows
through symmetry breaking of statistical homogeneity. New J. Phys.,
16 (3), 035 006, doi:10.1088/1367-2630/16/3/035006.
Read, P. L., and Coauthors, 2007: Dynamics of convectively driven
banded jets in the laboratory. J. Atmos. Sci., 64, 4031–4052,
doi:10.1175/2007JAS2219.1.
Rhines, P. B., 1975: Waves and turbulence on a beta-plane. J. Fluid
Mech., 69, 417–433, doi:10.1017/S0022112075001504.
Salyk, C., A. P. Ingersoll, J. Lorre, A. Vasavada, and A. D. Del Genio, 2006: Interaction between eddies and mean flow in Jupiter’s atmosphere: Analysis of Cassini imaging data. Icarus, 185, 430–442,
doi:10.1016/j.icarus.2006.08.007.
Shepherd, T. G., 1987: Rossby waves and two-dimensional turbulence in a large-scale zonal jet. J. Fluid Mech., 183, 467–509,
doi:10.1017/S0022112087002738.
Srinivasan, K., and W. R. Young, 2012: Zonostrophic instability. J. Atmos. Sci., 69 (5), 1633–1656, doi:10.1175/JAS-D-11-0200.1.
Srinivasan, K., and W. R. Young, 2014: Reynold stress and eddy difusivity of β -plane shear flows. J. Atmos. Sci., 71 (6), 2169–2185,
doi:10.1175/JAS-D-13-0246.1.
Starr, V. P., 1968: Physics of negative viscosity phenomena. McGraw
Hill, New York, 256 pp.
Thomas, V., B. K. Lieu, M. R. Jovanović, B. F. Farrell, P. J. Ioannou,
and D. F. Gayme, 2014: Self-sustaining turbulence in a restricted
nonlinear model of plane Couette flow. Phys. Fluids, 26, 105 112,
doi:10.1063/1.4898159.
Tobias, S. M., K. Dagon, and J. B. Marston, 2011: Astrophysical fluid
dynamics via direct numerical simulation. Astrophys. J., 727, 127,
doi:10.1088/0004-637X/727/2/127.
Tobias, S. M., and J. B. Marston, 2013: Direct statistical simulation of out-of-equilibrium jets. Phys. Rev. Lett., 110 (10), 104 502,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.104502.
Vallis, G. K., and M. E. Maltrud, 1993:
Generation of
mean flows and jets on a beta-plane and over topography. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 23, 1346–1362, doi:10.1175/15200485(1993)023<1346:GOMFAJ>2.0.CO;2.

27

Vasavada, A. R., and A. P. Showman, 2005: Jovian atmospheric dynamics: an update after Galileo and Cassini. Rep. Prog. Phys., 68,
1935–1996, doi:10.1088/0034-4885/68/8/R06.

