Quantum Theory of Geometry I: Area Operators∗
Abhay Ashtekar1† and Jerzy Lewandowski2,3 ‡

arXiv:gr-qc/9602046v2 23 Aug 1996

1 Center for Gravitational Physics and Geometry

Physics Department, Penn State, University Park, PA 16802, USA
2 Institute of Theoretical Physics,
Warsaw University, ul Hoza 69, 00-681 Warsaw, Poland
3 Max Planck Institut für Gravitationphysik,
Schlaatzweg 1, 14473 Potsdam, Germany

Abstract

A new functional calculus, developed recently for a fully nonperturbative treatment of quantum gravity, is used to begin a systematic
construction of a quantum theory of geometry. Regulated operators corresponding to areas of 2-surfaces are introduced and shown to be self-adjoint
on the underlying (kinematical) Hilbert space of states. It is shown that
their spectra are purely discrete indicating that the underlying quantum
geometry is far from what the continuum picture might suggest. Indeed,
the fundamental excitations of quantum geometry are 1-dimensional, rather
like polymers, and the 3-dimensional continuum geometry emerges only on
coarse graining. The full Hilbert space admits an orthonormal decomposition into finite dimensional sub-spaces which can be interpreted as the
spaces of states of spin systems. Using this property, the complete spectrum of the area operators is evaluated. The general framework constructed
here will be used in a subsequent paper to discuss 3-dimensional geometric
operators, e.g., the ones corresponding to volumes of regions.

∗ It is a pleasure to dedicate this article to Professor Andrzej Trautman, who was one of the

first to recognize the deep relation between geometry and the physics of gauge fields1,2 which
lies at the heart of this investigation.
† Electronic address: ashtekar@phys.psu.edu
‡ Electronic address: jerzy.lewandowski@fuw.edu.pl

1

I. INTRODUCTION

In his celebrated inaugural address, Riemann suggested [3] that geometry of space
may be more than just a fiducial, mathematical entity serving as a passive stage for
physical phenomena, and may in fact have a direct physical meaning in its own right.
General relativity proved this vision to be correct: Einstein’s equations put geometry on
the same footing as matter. Now, the physics of this century has shown us that matter
has constituents and the 3-dimensional objects we perceive as solids in fact have a discrete
underlying structure. The continuum description of matter is an approximation which
succeeds brilliantly in the macroscopic regime but fails hopelessly at the atomic scale.
It is therefore natural to ask if the same is true of geometry. Does geometry also have
constituents at the Planck scale? What are its atoms? Its elementary excitations? Is the
space-time continuum only a “coarse-grained” approximation? If so, what is the nature
of the underlying quantum geometry?
To probe such issues, it is natural to look for hints in the procedures that have been
successful in describing matter. Let us begin by asking what we mean by quantization of
physical quantities. Let us take a simple example –the hydrogen atom. In this case, the
answer is clear: while the basic observables –energy and angular momentum– take on a
continuous range of values classically, in quantum mechanics their spectra are discrete.
So, we can ask if the same is true of geometry. Classical geometrical observables such as
areas of surfaces and volumes of regions can take on continuous values on the phase space
of general relativity. Are the spectra of corresponding quantum operators discrete? If so,
we would say that geometry is quantized.
Thus, it is rather easy to pose the basic questions in a precise fashion. Indeed, they
could have been formulated soon after the advent of quantum mechanics. Answering them,
on the other hand, has proved to be surprisingly difficult. The main reason, it seems, is
the inadequacy of the standard techniques. More precisely, the traditional approach to
quantum field theory has been perturbative, where one begins with a continuum, background geometry. It is then difficult to see how discreteness would arise in the spectra of
geometric operators. To analyze such issues, one needs a fully non-perturbative approach:
geometric operators have to be constructed ab-initio without assuming any background
geometry. To probe the nature of quantum geometry, we can not begin by assuming the
validity of the continuum picture. We must let quantum gravity itself decide whether
this picture is adequate at the Planck scale; the theory itself should lead us to the correct
microscopic picture of geometry.
In this paper, we will use the non-perturbative, canonical approach to quantum gravity
based on connections to probe these issues. Over the past three years, this approach has
been put on a firm mathematical footing through the development of a new functional
calculus on the space of gauge equivalent connections [4-11]. This calculus does not
use any background fields (such as a metric) and is therefore well-suited to a fully nonperturbative treatment. The purpose of this paper is to use this framework to explore the
nature of quantum geometry.
In section 2, we recall the relevant results from the new functional calculus and out2

line the general strategy. In section 3, we present a regularization of the area operator.
Its properties are discussed in section 4; in particular, we exhibit its entire spectrum.
Our analysis is carried out in the “connection representation” and the discussion is selfcontained. However, at a non-technical level, there is a close similarity between the basic
ideas used here and those used in discussions based on the “loop representation” [12,13].
Indeed, the development of the functional calculus which underlies this analysis itself was
motivated, in a large measure, by the pioneering work on loop representation by Rovelli
and Smolin [14]. The relation between various approaches will discussed in section 5.
The main result of this paper should have ramifications on the statistical mechanical origin of the entropy of black holes along the lines of [15,16]. This issue is being
investigated.
II. PRELIMINARIES

This section is divided into three parts. In the first, we will recall [4,5] the basic
structure of the quantum configuration space and, in the second, that of the Hilbert
space of (kinematic) quantum states [10]. The overall strategy will be summarized in the
third part.
A. Quantum configuration space

In general relativity, one can regard the space A/G of SU(2) connections modulo
gauge transformations on a (“spatial”) 3-manifold Σ as the classical configuration space
[17–19]. For systems with only a finite number of degrees of freedom, the classical configuration space also serves as the domain space of quantum wave functions, i.e., as the
quantum configuration space. For systems with an infinite number of degrees of freedom, on the other hand, this is not true: generically, the quantum configuration space
is an enlargement of the classical. In free field theory in Minkowski space (as well as
exactly solvable models in low space-time dimensions), for example, while the classical
configuration space can be built from suitably smooth fields, the quantum configuration
space includes all (tempered) distributions. This is an important point because, typically,
the classical configuration spaces are of zero measure; wave functions with support only
on smooth configurations have zero norm! The overall situation is the same in general
relativity. The quantum configuration space A/G is a certain completion of A/G [4,5].
The space A/G inherits the quotient structure of A/G, i.e., A/G is the quotient of the
space A of generalized connections by the space G of generalized gauge transformations.
To see the nature of the generalization involved, recall first that each smooth connection
R
defines a holonomy along paths 1 in Σ: hp (A) := P exp − p A. Generalized connections
1 For technical reasons, we will assume that all paths are analytic. An extension of the frame-

3

capture this notion. That is, each Ā in A can be defined [6,8] as a map which assigns
to each oriented path p in Σ an element Ā(p) of SU(2) such that: i) Ā(p−1 ) = (Ā(p))−1 ;
and, ii) Ā(p2 ◦ p1 ) = Ā(p2 ) · Ā(p1 ), where p−1 is obtained from p by simply reversing the
orientation, p2 ◦ p1 denotes the composition of the two paths (obtained by connecting
the end of p1 with the beginning of p2 ) and Ā(p2 ) · Ā(p1 ) is the composition in SU(2).
A generalized gauge transformation is a map g which assigns to each point v of Σ an
SU(2) element g(x) (in an arbitrary, possibly discontinuous fashion). It acts on Ā in
the expected manner, at the end points of paths: Ā(p) → g(v+ )−1 · Ā(p) · g(v− ), where
v− and v+ are respectively the beginning and the end point of p. If Ā happens to be a
smooth connections, say A, we have Ā(p) = hp (A). However, in general, Ā(p) can not
be expressed as a path ordered exponential of a smooth 1-form with values in the Lie
algebra of SU(2) [5]. Similarly, in general, a generalized gauge transformation can not be
represented by a smooth group valued function on Σ.
At first sight the spaces A, G and A/G seem too large to be mathematically controllable. However, they admit three characterizations which enables one to introduce
differential and integral calculus on them [4,5,7]. We will conclude this sub-section by
summarizing the characterization –as suitable limits of the corresponding spaces in lattice gauge theory– which will be most useful for the main body of this paper.
We begin with some definitions. An edge is an oriented, 1-dimensional sub-manifold
of Σ with two boundary points, called vertices, which is analytic everywhere, including
the vertices. A graph in Σ is a collection of edges such that if two distinct edges meet,
they do so only at vertices. In the physics terminology, one can think of a graph as a
“floating lattice”, i.e., a lattice whose edges are not required to be rectangular. (Indeed,
they may even be non-trivially knotted!) Using the standard ideas from lattice gauge
theory, we can construct the configuration space associated with the graph γ. Thus, we
have the space Aγ , each element Aγ of which assigns to every edge in γ an element of
SU(2) and the space Gγ each element gγ of which assigns to each vertex in γ an element
of SU(2). (Thus, if N is the number of edges in γ and V the number of vertices, Aγ
is isomorphic with [SU(2)]N and Gγ with [SU(2)]V ). Gγ has the obvious action on Aγ :
Aγ (e) → g(v+ )−1 · Aγ (e) · g(v− ). The (gauge invariant) configuration space associated
with the floating lattice γ is just Aγ /Gγ . The spaces A, G and A/G can be obtained as
well-defined (projective) limits of the spaces Aγ , Gγ and Aγ /Gγ [7,5]. Note however that
this limit is not the usual “continuum limit” of a lattice gauge theory in which one lets
the edge length go to zero. Here, we are already in the continuum and have available to
us all possible floating lattices from the beginning. We are just expressing the quantum
configuration space of the continuum theory as a suitable limit of the configuration spaces
of theories associated with all these lattices.

work to allow for smooth paths is being carried out [20]. The general expectation is that the
main results will admit natural generalizations to the smooth category. In this article, A has the
physical dimensions of a connection, (length)−1 and is thus related to the configuration variable
Aold in the literature by A = GAold where G is Newton’s constant.

4

To summarize, the quantum configuration space A/G is a specific extension of the
classical configuration space A/G. Quantum states can be expressed as complex-valued,
square-integrable functions on A/G, or, equivalently, as G-invariant square-integrable
functions on A. As in Minkowskian field theories, while A/G is dense in A/G topologically,
measure theoretically it is generally sparse; typically, A/G is contained in a subset set of
zero measure of A/G [7]. Consequently, what matters is the value of wave functions on
“genuinely ” generalized connections. In contrast with the usual Minkowskian situation,
however, A, G and A/G are all compact spaces in their natural (Gel’fand) topologies [4-8].
This fact simplifies a number of technical issues.
Our construction can be compared with the general framework of ‘second quantization’
proposed by Kijowski [21] already twenty years ago. He introduced the space of states
for a field theory by using the projective limit of spaces of states associated to a family
of finite dimensional theories. He also, suggested, as an example, the lattice approach.
The common element with the present approach is that in our case the space of measures
on A is also the projective limit of the spaces of measures defined on finite dimensional
spaces Aγ .
B. Hilbert space

Since A/G is compact, it admits regular (Borel, normalized) measures and for every
such measure we can construct a Hilbert space of square-integrable functions. Thus, to
construct the Hilbert space of quantum states, we need to select a specific measure on
A/G.
It turns out that A admits a measure µo that is preferred by both mathematical and
physical considerations [5,6]. Mathematically, the measure µo is natural because its definition does not involve introduction of any additional structure: it is induced on A by the
Haar measure on SU(2). More precisely, since Aγ is isomorphic to [SU(2)]N , the Haar
measure on SU(2) induces on it a measure µoγ in the obvious fashion. As we vary γ, we
obtain a family of measures which turn out to be compatible in an appropriate sense and
therefore induce a measure µo on A. This measure has the following attractive
properties
R
[5]: i) it is faithful; i.e., for any continuous, non-negative function f on A, dµo f ≥ 0,
equality holding if and only if f is identically zero; and, ii) it is invariant under the (induced) action of Diff[Σ], the diffeomorphism group of Σ. Finally, µo induces a natural
measure µ̃o on A/G: µ̃o is simply the push-forward of µo under the projection map that
sends A to A/G. Physically, the measure µ̃o is selected by the so-called “reality conditions”. More precisely, the classical phase space admits an (over)complete set of naturally
defined configuration and momentum variables which are real, and the requirement that
the corresponding operators on the quantum Hilbert space be self-adjoint selects for us
the measure µ̃o [10].
Thus, it is natural to use H̃o := L2 (A/G, dµ̃o ) as our Hilbert space. Elements of H̃o
are the kinematic states; we are yet to impose quantum constraints. Thus, H̃o is the
classical analog of the full phase-space of quantum gravity (prior to the introduction of

5

the constraint sub-manifold). Note that these quantum states can be regarded also as
gauge invariant functions on A. In fact, since the spaces under consideration are compact
and measures normalized, we can regard H̃o as the gauge invariant sub-space of the Hilbert
space Ho := L2 (A, dµo ) of square-integrable functions on A [6,7]. In what follows, we we
will often do so.
What do “typical” quantum states look like? To provide an intuitive picture, we can
proceed as follows. Fix a graph γ with N edges and consider functions Ψγ of generalized
connections of the form Ψγ (Ā) = ψ(Ā(e1 ), ..., Ā(eN )) for some smooth function ψ on
[SU(2)]N , where e1 , ..., eN are the edges of the graph γ. Thus, the functions Ψγ know
about what the generalized connections do only to those paths which constitute the edges
of the graph γ; they are precisely the quantum states of the gauge theory associated
with the “floating lattice” γ. This space of states, although infinite dimensional, is quite
“small” in the sense that it corresponds to the Hilbert space associated with a system
with only a finite number of degrees of freedom. However, if we vary γ through all possible
graphs, the collection of all states that results is very large. Indeed, one can show that it
is dense in the Hilbert space Ho . (If we restrict ourselves to Ψγ which are gauge invariant,
we obtain a dense sub-space in H̃o .) Since each of these states depends only on a finite
number of variables, borrowing the terminology from the quantum theory of free fields
in Minkowski space, they are called cylindrical functions and denoted by Cyl. Gauge
invariant cylindrical functions represent the “typical” kinematic states. In many ways,
Cyl is analogous to the space Co∞ (R3 ) of smooth functions of compact support on R3
which is dense in the Hilbert space L2 (R3 , d3 x) of quantum mechanics. Just as one often
defines quantum operators – e.g., the position, the momentum and the Hamiltonians– on
Co∞ first and then extends them to an appropriately larger domain in the Hilbert space
L2 (R3 , d3 x), we will define our operators first on Cyl and then extend them appropriately.
Cylindrical functions provide considerable intuition about the nature of quantum
states we are led to consider. These states represent 1-dimensional polymer-like excitations of geometry/gravity rather than 3-dimensional wavy undulations on flat space.
Just as a polymer, although intrinsically 1-dimensional, exhibits 3-dimensional properties
in sufficiently complex and densely packed configurations, the fundamental 1-dimensional
excitations of geometry can be packed appropriately to provide a geometry which, when
coarse-grained on scales much larger than the Planck length, lead us to continuum geometries [12,22]. Thus, in this description, gravitons can arise only as approximate notions
in the low energy regime [23]. At the basic level, states in H̃o are fundamentally different
from the Fock states of Minkowskian quantum field theories. The main reason is the
underlying diffeomorphism invariance: In absence of a background geometry, it is not
possible to introduce the familiar Gaussian measures and associated Fock spaces.
C. Statement of the problem

We can now outline the general strategy that will be followed in sections 4 and 5.

6

Recall that the classical configuration variable is an SU(2) connection2 Aia on a 3manifold Σ, where i is the su(2)-internal index with respect to a basis τi . Its conjugate
momentum Ejb has the geometrical interpretation of an orthonormal triad with density
weight one [24,17], the precise Poisson brackets being:
{Aia (x), Ejb (y)} = Gδab δji δ 3 (x, y) ,

(2.1)

where G is Newton’s constant. (Recall from footnote 1 that the field A, used here, is
related to Aold used in the literature [25] via A = GAold .)
Therefore, geometrical observables –functionals of the 3-metric– can be expressed in
terms of this field Eia . Fix within the 3-manifold Σ any analytic, finite 2-surface S without
boundary such that the closure of S in Σ is a compact. The area AS of S is a well-defined,
real-valued function on the full phase space of general relativity (which happens to depend
only on Eia ). It is easy to verify that these kinematical observables can be expressed as:
AS :=

Z

S

1

dx1 ∧ dx2 [Ei3 E 3i ] 2 ,

(2.2)

where, for simplicity, we have used adapted coordinates such that S is given by x3 = 0,
and x1 , x2 parameterize S, and where the internal index i is raised by a the inner product
we use on su(2), k(τi , τj ) = −2Tr(τi τj ).
Our task is to find the corresponding operators on the kinematical Hilbert space H̃o
and investigate their properties.
There are several factors that make this task difficult. Intuitively, one would expect
that Eia (x) to be replaced by the “operator-valued distribution” −ih̄Gδ/δAia (x). Unfortunately, the classical expression of AS involves square-roots of products of E’s and hence the
formal expression of the corresponding operator is badly divergent. One must introduce
a suitable regularization scheme. Unfortunately, we do not have at our disposal the usual
machinery of Minkowskian field theories and even the precise rules that are to underlie
such a regularization are not apriori clear.
There are however certain basic expectations that we can use as guidelines: i) the
resulting operators should be well-defined on a dense sub-space of H̃o ; ii) their final
expressions should be diffeomorphism covariant, and hence, in particular, independent of
any background fields that may be used in the intermediate steps of the regularization
procedure; and, iii) since the classical observables are real-valued, the operators should be
self-adjoint. These expectations seem to be formidable at first. Indeed, these demands are
rarely met even in Minkowskian field theories; in presence of interactions, it is extremely
difficult to establish rigorously that physically interesting operators are well-defined and

2 We assume that the underlying 3-manifold Σ is orientable.

Hence, principal SU (2) bundles
over Σ are all topologically trivial. Therefore, we can represent the SU (2) connections on the
bundle by a su(2)-valued 1-form on Σ. The matrices τi are anti-Hermitian, given, e.g., by
(−i/2)-times the Pauli matrices.

7

self-adjoint. As we will see, the reason why one can succeed in the present case is twofolds. First, the requirement of diffeomorphism covariance is a powerful restriction that
severely limits the possibilities. Second, the background independent functional calculus
is extremely well-suited for the problem and enables one to circumvent the various road
blocks in subtle ways.
Our general strategy will be following. We will define the regulated versions of area
operators on the dense sub-space Cyl of cylindrical functions and show that they are
essentially self-adjoint (i.e., admit unique self-adjoint extensions to H̃o ). This task is
further simplified because the operators leave each sub-space Hγ spanned by cylindrical
functions associated with any one graph γ invariant. This in effect reduces the field theory
problem (i.e., one with an infinite number of degrees of freedom) to a quantum mechanics
problem (in which there are only a finite number of degrees of freedom). Finally, we
will find that the operators in fact leave invariant certain finite dimensional sub-space
of Ho (associated with extended spin networks, introduced in Sec. 4.2). This powerful
simplification further reduces the task of investigating the properties of these operators;
in effect, the quantum mechanical problem (in which the Hilbert space is still infinite
dimensional) is further simplified to a problem involving spin systems (where the Hilbert
space is finite dimensional). It is because of these simplifications that a complete analysis
is possible.
III. REGULARIZATION

Our task is to construct a well-defined operator ÂS starting from the classical expression (2.2). As is usual in quantum field theory, we will begin with the formal expression
obtained by replacing Ei3 in (2.2) by the corresponding operator valued distribution Êi3 and
then regulate it to obtain the required ÂS . (For an early discussion of non-perturbative
regularization, see, in particular, [26]). Our discussion will be divided in to two parts.
In the first, we introduce the basic tools and, in the second, we apply them to obtain a
well-defined operator ÂS .
To simplify the presentation, let us first assume that S is covered by a single chart
of adapted coordinates. Extension to the general case is straightforward: one mimics the
procedure used to define the integral of a differential form over a manifold. That is, one
takes advantage of the coordinates invariance of the the resulting ‘local’ operator and uses
a partition of unity.
A. Tools

The regularization procedure involves two main ingredients. We will begin by summarizing them.
The first involves smearing of (the operator analog of) Ei3 (x) and point splitting of
the integrand in (2.2). Since in this integrand, the point x lies on the 2-surface S, let

8

us try to use a 2-dimensional smearing function. Let fǫ (x, y) be a 1-parameter family of
fields on S which tend to the δ(x, y) as ǫ tends to zero; i.e., such that
lim

Z

d2 y fǫ (x1 , x2 ; y 1, y 2)g(y 1, y 2) = g(x1 , x2 ) ,

ǫ→0 S

(3.1)

for all smooth densities g of weight 1 and of compact support on S. (Thus, fǫ (x, y) is
a density of weight 1 in x and a function in y.) The smeared version of Ei3 (x) will be
defined to be:
[Ei3 ]f (x) :=

Z

S

d2 y fǫ (x, y)Ei3(y) ,

(3.2)

so that, as ǫ tends to zero, [Ei3 ]f tends to Ei3 (x). The point-splitting strategy now provides
a ‘regularized expression’ of area:
[AS ]f :=
=

Z

ZS

S

d2 x [

Z

S

d2 y fǫ (x, y)Ei3 (y)

Z

1

S

d2 z fǫ (x, z)E 3i (z) ] 2

1

2

d x [[Ei3 ]f (x)[E 3i ]f (x)] 2 ,

(3.3)

which will serve as the point of departure in the next subsection. To simplify technicalities,
we will assume that the smearing field fǫ (x, y) has the following additional properties for
sufficiently small ǫ > 0: i) for any given y, fǫ (x, y) has compact support in x which shrinks
uniformly to y; and, ii) fǫ (x, y) is non-negative. These conditions are very mild and we
are thus left with a large class of regulators.3
We now introduce the second ingredient. To go over to the quantum theory, we want
to replace Ei3 in (3.3) by Êi3 = −iGh̄δ/δAi3 . However, it is not apriori clear that, even after
smearing, [Êi3 ]f is a well-defined operator because: i)our wave functions Ψ are functionals
of generalized connections Ā, whence it is not obvious what the functional derivative
means; and, ii) we have smeared the operator only along two dimensions. Let us discuss
these points one by one.
First, let us fix a graph γ and consider a cylindrical function Ψγ on A,
Ψγ (Ā) = ψ(Ā(e1 ), .., Ā(eN )) ,

(3.4)

where, as before, N is the total number of edges of γ and where ψ is a smooth function
on [SU(2)]N . Now, a key fact about generalized connections is that, for any given graph
γ, each Ā is equivalent to some smooth connection A [5]: Given any Ā, there exists an A
such that
Z

Ā(ek ) = hk [A] := P exp −

ek

A,

(3.5)

3 For example, f (x, y) can be constructed as follows. Take any non-negative function f of
ǫ
R
compact support on S such that d2 xf (x) = 1 and set fǫ (x, y) = (1/ǫ2 )f ((x − y)/ǫ). Here, we

have implicitly used the given chart to give fǫ (x, y) a density weight in x.

9

for all k = 1, ..., N. (For any given Ā, the smooth connection A is of course not unique.
However, this ambiguity does not affect the considerations that follow.) Hence, there is a
1-1 correspondence between the cylindrical function Ψγ on A and function ψ(h1 (A), ...,hE (A)) on the space A of smooth connections and we can apply the operator [Êi3 ]f to the
latter. The result is:
[Êi3 ]f (x) · Ψγ (Ā) = −iGh̄
= iℓ2P

Z

S

N
X Z

I=1
2

S

d2 yfǫ (x, y) (

d y fǫ (x, y)

N
X

I=1

[

∂ψ
δhI
)(A)
) |y3 =0 (
i
δAa (y)
∂hI

Z 1
0

(hI (1, t)τ i hI (t, 0))A
B]

dt e˙I 3 (t) δ(y 1, e1I (t))δ(y 2 , e2I (t))δ(0, e3I (t))
∂ψ
(A) ,
∂hI A
B

(3.6)

√
where, ℓP = Gh̄ is the Planck length, the index I labels the edges in the graph, [0, 1] ∋
R ′
t 7→ eI (t) is any parameterization of an edge eI , hI (t′ , t) := P exp − tt Aa (eI (s))ėaI (s)ds
is the holonomy of the connection A along the edge eI from parameter value t to t′ . Thus,
the functional derivative has a well-defined action on cylindrical functions; the first of the
two problems mentioned above has been overcome.
However, because of the presence of the delta distributions, it is still not clear that
[Êi3 ]f is a genuine operator (rather than a distribution-valued operator). To explicitly see
that it is, we need to specify some further details. Given a graph γ, we can just subdivide
some of its its edges and thus obtain a graph γ ′ which occupies the same points in Σ as
γ but has (trivially) more vertices and edges. Every function which is cylindrical with
respect to the “smaller” graph γ is obviously cylindrical with respect to the “larger” graph
γ ′ as well. The idea is to use this freedom to simplify the discussion by imposing some
conditions on our graph γ. We will assume that: i) if an edge eI contains a segment which
lies in S, then it lies entirely in the closure of S; ii) each isolated intersection of γ with
the 2-surface S is a vertex of γ; and, iii) each edge eI of γ intersects S at most once. (The
overlapping edges are often called edges ‘tangential’ to S; they should not be confused
with edges which ‘cross’ S but whose tangent vector at the intersection point is tangent
to S). If the given graph does not satisfy one or more of these conditions, we can obtain
one which does simply by sub-dividing of some of the edges. Thus these conditions are
not restrictive. They are introduced to simplify the “book-keeping” in calculations.
Let us now return to (3.6). If an edge eI has no point in common with S, it does
not contribute to the sum. If it is contained in S, ė3I vanishes identically whence its
contribution also vanishes. (For a subtlety, see the remark below Eq (3.11).) We are
thus left with edges which intersect S in isolated points. Let us first consider only those
edges which are ‘outgoing’ at the intersection. Then, at the intersection point, the value
of the parameter t is zero and, for a given edge eI , e˙I 3 is positive (negative) if eI is
directed “upwards” along increasing x3 (“downwards” along decreasing x3 ). Hence, (3.6)

10

becomes4 :
[Êi3 ]f (x) · Ψγ =
=

Z

N
iℓ2P h X
∂ψ
[ d2 yκI fǫ (x, y)δ(y 1, e1I (0))δ(y 2, e2I (0))(hI τ i )A
B]
2 I=1 S
∂hI A
B

X
iℓ2P N
κI fǫ (x, eI (0)) LiI · ψ(Ā(e1 ), ..., Ā(eN )) ,
2 I=1

(3.7)

where, the constant κI associated with the edge eI is given by:

 0,

if eI is tangential to S or does not intersect S,
κI =  +1, if eI has an isolated intersection with S and lies above S
−1, if eI has an isolated intersection with S and lies below S

(3.8)

and where LiI is the left invariant vector field in the i-th internal direction on the copy of
SU(2) corresponding to the I-th edge
LiI · ψ(Ā(e1 ), ..., Ā(eN )) = (Ā(eI )τ i )A
B

∂ψ
.
∂(Ā(eI ))A
B

(3.9)

If some of the edges are ‘incoming’ at the intersection point, then the final expression of
[Êia ]f (x) can be written as:
[Êi3 ]f (x) · Ψγ =

N
i
iℓ2P h X
κI fǫ (x, vαI ) XIi · ψ(Ā(e1 ), ..., Ā(eN )) ,
2 I=1

(3.10)

where XIi is an operator assigned to a vertex v and an edge eI intersecting v by the
following formula

 (Ā(eI )τ i )A
B

XIi · ψ(Ā(e1 ), ..., Ā(eN )) = 

∂ψ
,
∂(Ā(eI ))A
B
∂ψ
−(τ i Ā(eI ))A
B ∂(Ā(eI ))A ,
B

when eI is outgoing
when eI is incoming

(3.11)

Remark: Let us briefly return to the edges which are tangential to S. In this case,
although ė3I vanishes, we also have a singular term δ(0, 0) (in the x3 direction) in (3.6).
Hence, to recover an unambiguous answer, for these edges, we need to smear also in
the third direction using an additional regulator, say gǫ′ (x3 , y 3). When this is done, one
finds that the contribution of the tangential edges vanishes even before removing the
regulator; as stated earlier, the tangential edges do not contribute. We did not introduce
the smearing in the third direction right in the beginning to emphasize the point that this
step is unnecessary for the edges whose contributions survive in the end.
The right side again defines a cylindrical function based on the (same) graph γ. Denote
by Hγo the Hilbert space L2 (Aγ , dµoγ ) of square integrable cylindrical functions associated
R∞

dzg(z)δ(z) = 21 g(0) which follows if the
δ(z) is obtained, in the standard fashion, as a limit of functions which are symmetric about 0.
4 In the first step, we have used the regularization

11

0

with a fixed graph γ. Since µoγ is the induced Haar measure on Aγ and since the operator
is just a sum of right/left invariant vector fields, standard results in analysis imply that,
with domain Cyl1γ of all C 1 cylindrical functions based on γ, it is an essentially self-adjoint
on Hγo . Now, it is straightforward to verify that the operators on Hγo obtained by varying
γ are all compatible5 in the appropriate sense. Hence, it follows from the general results
in [8] that [Êi3 ]f (x), with domain Cyl1 (the space of all C 1 cylindrical functions), is an
essentially self-adjoint operator on Ho . For notational simplicity, we will denote its selfadjoint extension also by [Êi3 ]f (x). (The context should make it clear whether we are
referring to the essentially self-adjoint operator or its extension.)
The fact that this operator is well-defined may seem surprising at first sight since
we have used only a 2-dimensional smearing. Recall however that in free field theory
in Minkowski space, the action of the momentum operator on cylindrical functions is
well-defined in the same sense without any smearing at all. In our case, a 2-dimensional
smearing is needed because our states contain one –rather than three- dimensional excitations.
B. Area operators

Let us now turn to the integrand of the smeared area operator (corresponding to (3.3)).
Denoting the determinant of the intrinsic metric on S by gS , we have:
[ĝS ]f (x) · Ψγ := [Ei3 ]f (x)[E 3i ]f (x) · Ψγ
ℓ4 X
= − P[
κ(I, J)fǫ (x, vαI )fǫ (x, vαJ ) XIi XJi ] · Ψγ ,
4 I,J

(3.12)

where the summation goes over all the oriented pairs (I, J); vαI and vαJ are the vertices
at which edges eI and eJ intersect S; κ(I, J) = κI κJ equals 0 if either of the two edges eI
and eJ fails to intersect S or lies entirely in S, +1 if they lie on the same side of S, and, −1
if they lie on the opposite sides. (For notational simplicity, from now on we shall not keep
track of the position of the internal indices i; as noted in Sec. 2.3, they are contracted
using the invariant metric on the Lie algebra su(2).) The next step is to consider vertices
vα at which γ intersects S and simply rewrite the above sum by re-grouping terms by
vertices. The result simplifies if we choose ǫ sufficiently small so that, fǫ (x, vαI )fǫ (x, vαJ )
is zero unless vαI = vαJ . We then have:

5 Given two graphs, γ and γ ′ , we say that γ ≥ γ ′ if and only if every edge of γ ′ can be written as

a composition of edges of γ. Given two such graphs, there is a projection map from Aγ to Aγ ′ ,
which, via pull-back, provides an unitary embedding Uγ,γ ′ of H̃γo ′ into H̃γo . A family of operators
Oγ on the Hilbert spaces Hγo is said to be compatible if Uγ,γ ′ Oγ ′ = Oγ Uγ,γ ′ and Uγ,γ ′ Dγ ′ ⊂ Dγ
for all γ ≥ γ ′ , where Dγ and Dγ ′ are the domains of Oγ and Og′ .

12

X
ℓ4 X
κ(Iα , Jα )XIiα XJi α ] · Ψγ ,
(fǫ (x, vα ))2
[ĝS ]f (x) · Ψγ = − P [
4 α
Iα ,Jα

(3.13)

where the index α labels the vertices on S and Iα and Jα label the edges at the vertex α.
The next step is to take the square-root of this expression. The same reasoning that
established the self-adjointness of [Êi3 ]f (x) now implies that [ĝS ]f (x) is a non-negative selfadjoint operator and hence has a well-defined square-root which is also a positive definite
self-adjoint operator. Since we have chosen ǫ to be sufficiently small, for any given point
x in S, fǫ (x, vα ) is non-zero for at most one vertex vα . We can therefore take the sum
over α outside the square-root. One then obtains
1

([ĝS ]f ) 2 (x) · Ψγ =

X
1
ℓ2P X
κ(Iα , Jα )XIiα XJi α ] 2 · Ψγ .
fǫ (x, vα )[
2 α
Iα ,Jα

(3.14)

Note that the operator is neatly split; the x-dependence all resides in fǫ and the operator
within the square-root is “internal” in the sense that it acts only on copies of SU(2).
Finally, we can remove the regulator, i.e., take the limit as ǫ tends to zero. By
integrating both sides against test functions on S and then taking the limit, we conclude
that the following equality holds in the distributional sense:
X
1
ℓ2 X (2)
√
d
κ(Iα , Jα )XIiα XJi α ] 2 · Ψγ .
δ (x, vα )[
gS (x) · Ψγ = P
2 α
Iα ,Jα

(3.15)

Hence, the regularized area operator is given by:
1
ℓ2P X X
[
κ(Iα , Jα )XIiα XJi α ] 2 · Ψγ .
ÂS · Ψγ =
2 α Iα ,Jα

(3.16)

(Here, as before, α labels the vertices at which γ intersects S and Iα labels the edges of
γ at the vertex vα .) With Cyl2 as its domain, ÂS is essentially self-adjoint on the Hilbert
space Ho .
Let us now remove the assumption that the surface Σ is covered by a single chart of
adapted coordinates. If such a global chart does not exist, we can cover Σ with a family
U of neighborhoods such that for each U ∈ U there exists a local coordinates system (xa )
adapted to Σ. Let (ϕU )U ∈U be a partition of unity associated to U. We just repeat the
above regularization for a slightly modified classical surface area functional, namely for
AS,U :=

Z

1

S

dx1 ∧ dx2 ϕU [Ei3 E 3i ] 2

(3.17)

which has support within a domain U of an adapted chart. Thus, we obtain the operator
AˆSU . Then we just define
ÂS =

X

ÂS,U .

U ∈U

13

(3.18)

The result is given again by the formula (3.16). The reason why the functions ϕU disappear
from the result is that the operator obtained for a single domain of an adapted chart is
insensitive on changes of this chart. This concludes our technical discussion.
The classical expression AS of (2.2) is a rather complicated. It is therefore somewhat
surprising that the corresponding quantum operators can be constructed rigorously and
have quite manageable expressions. The essential reason is the underlying diffeomorphism
invariance which severely restricts the possible operators. Given a surface and a graph,
the only diffeomorphism invariant entities are the intersection vertices. Thus, a diffeomorphism covariant operator can only involve structure at these vertices. In our case, it
just acts on the copies of SU(2) associated with various edges at these vertices.
We have presented this derivation in considerable detail to spell out all the assumptions, to bring out the generality of the procedure and to illustrate how regularization can
be carried out in a fully non-perturbative treatment. While one is free to introduce auxiliary structures such as preferred charts or background fields in the intermediate steps, the
final result must respect the underlying diffeomorphism invariance of the theory. These
basic ideas will be used repeatedly for other geometric operators in the sequel to this
paper.
C. General properties of operators

1. Discreteness of the spectrum: By inspection, it follows that the total area operator
ÂS leaves the sub-space of Cyl2γ which is associated with any one graph γ invariant and
is a self-adjoint operator on the sub-space Hγo of Ho corresponding to γ. Next, recall that
Hγo = L2 (Aγ , dµo ), where Aγ is a compact manifold, isomorphic with (SU(2))N where N
is the total number of edges in γ. As, we explained below, the restriction of ÂS to Hγo
is given by certain commuting elliptic differential operators on this compact manifold.
Therefore, all its eigenvalues are discrete. Now suppose that the complete spectrum of
ÂS on Ho has a continuous part. Denote by Pc the associated projector. Then, given
any Ψ in Ho , Pc · Ψ is orthogonal to Hγo for any graph γ, and hence to the space Cyl of
cylindrical functions. Now, since Cyl2 is dense in Ho , Pc · Ψ must vanish for all Ψ in Ho .
Hence, the spectrum of ÂS has no continuous part.
Note that this method is rather general: It can be used to show that any self-adjoint
operator on Ho which maps (the intersection of its domain with) Hγo to Hγo , and whose
action on Hγo is given by elliptic differential operators, has a purely discrete spectrum on
Ho . Geometrical operators, constructed purely from the triad field tend to satisfy these
properties.
2. Area element: Note that not only is the total area operator well-defined, but in
√
fact it arises from a local area element, d
gS , which is an operator-valued distribution in
the usual sense. Thus, if we integrate it against test functions, the operator is densely
defined on Ho (with C 2 cylindrical functions as domain) and the matrix elements
√
gS (x) · Ψγ i
hΨ′ γ ′ , d
14

(3.19)

are 2-dimensional distributions on S. Furthermore, since we did not have to renormalize
the regularized operator (3.14) before removing the regulator, there are no free renormalization constants involved. The local operator is completely unambiguous.
3. [ĝS ]f versus its square-root: Although the regulated operator [ĝs ]f is well-defined,
if we let ǫ to go zero, the resulting operator is in fact divergent: roughly, it would lead
to the square of the 2-dimensional δ distribution. Thus, the determinant of the 2-metric
is not a well-defined in the quantum theory. As we saw, however, the square-root of the
determinant is well defined: We have to first take the square-root of the regulated expression and then remove the regulator. This, in effect, is the essence of the regularization
procedure.
To get around this divergence of ĝS , as is common in Minkowskian field theories, we
could have first rescaled [ĝS ]f ] by an appropriate factor and then taken the limit. Then
result can be a well-defined operator, but it will depend on the choice of the regulator,
i.e., additional structure introduced in the procedure. Indeed, if the resulting operator
is to have the same density character as its classical analog gS (x) –which is a scalar
density of weight two– then the operator can not respect the underlying diffeomorphism
invariance.6 For, there is no metric/chart independent distribution on S of density weight
two. Hence, such a ‘renormalized’ operator is not useful to a fully non-perturbative
approach. For the square-root, on the other hand, we need a local density of weight one.
And, the 2-dimensional Dirac distribution provides this; now is no apriori obstruction for a
satisfactory operator corresponding to the area element to exist. This is an illustration of
what appears to be typical in non-perturbative approaches to quantum gravity: Either the
limit of the operator exists as the regulator is removed without the need of renormalization
or it inherits back-ground dependent renormalization fields (rather than constants).
4. Vertex operators: As noted already, in the final expressions of the area element and
area operators, there is a clean separation between the ‘x-dependent’ and the ‘internal’
parts. Given a graph γ, the internal part is a sum of square-roots of the operators
△S,vα :=

X

κ(Iα , Jα )XIiα XJi α

(3.20)

Iα ,Jα

associated with the surface S and the vertex vα on it. It is straightforward to check
that operators corresponding to different vertices commute. Therefore, to analyze the
properties of area operators, we can focus just on one vertex operator at a time.
Furthermore, given the surface S and a point v on it, we can define an operator △S,v
on the dense sub-space Cyl2 on Ho as follows:
6 If, on the other hand, for some reason, we are willing to allow the limiting operator to have a

different density character than its classical analog, one can renormalize [ĝ]f (x) in such a way as
to obtain a background independent limit. For instance, we may use fǫ = (1/ǫ2 )θ(|x − x′ | − 2ǫ ),
and rescale [ĝ]f by ǫ2 before taking the limit. Then the limit is a well defined, diffeomorphism
covariant operator but it is a scalar density of weight one rather than two.

15

△S,v · Ψγ :=

P

i i
I,J κ(I, J)XI XJ

0,

· Ψγ , if γ intersects S in v,
Otherwise

(3.21)

where I and J label the edges of γ which have v as a vertex. (Recall that every cylindrical
function is associated with some graph γ. As before, if γ intersects S at v but v is not
a vertex of γ, one can extend γ just by adding a new vertex v and orienting the edges
at v to outgoing.) It is straightforward to verify that this definition is unambiguous: if
a cylindrical function can be represented in two different ways, say as Ψγ and Ψγ ′ , then
△S,v · Ψγ and △S,v · Ψγ ′ are two representations of the same function on A. There is a
precise sense [8] in which △S,v can be regarded as a Laplacian operator on Ho . The area
operator is a sum over all the points v of S of square-roots of Laplacians,
ÂS =

ℓ2P X q
−△S,v .
2 v∈S

(3.22)

(Here the sum is well defined because, for any cylindrical function, it contains only a
finite number of non-zero terms, corresponding to the isolated intersection points of the
associated graph with S). We will see in the next subsection that this fact is reflected in
its spectrum.
√
5. Gauge invariance: The classical area element gS is invariant under the internal
rotations of triads Eia ; its Poisson bracket with the Gauss constraint functional vanishes.
√
This symmetry is preserved in the quantum theory: the quantum operator d
gS commutes
√
o
d
with the induced action of G on the Hilbert space H . Thus, gS and the total area
operator ÂS map the space of gauge invariant states to itself; they project down to the
Hilbert space H̃o of kinematic states.
Note, however, that the regulated triad operators [Êi3 ]f are not gauge invariant; they
are defined only on Ho . Nonetheless, they are useful; they feature in an important way
in our regularization scheme. In the loop representation, by contrast, one can only introduce gauge invariant operators and hence the regulated triad operators do not exist.
Furthermore, even in the definition (3.3) of the regularized area element, one must use
holonomies to transport indices between the two points y and z. While this manifest
gauge invariance is conceptually pleasing, in practice it often makes the calculations in
the loop representation cumbersome; one has to keep track of these holonomy insertions
in the intermediate steps although they do not contribute to the final result.
6. Overall Factors: The overall numerical factors in the expressions of various operators considered above depend on two conventions. The first is the convention noted
in footnote 4 used in
the regularization procedure.
Could we not have used a different
R∞
R0
convention, setting 0 dzg(z)δ(z) = cg(0) and −∞ dzg(z)δ(z) = (1 − c)g(0) for some
constant c 6= 1/2? The answer is in the negative. For, in this case, the constant κI would
take values:


 0,

if eI is tangential to S or does not intersect S,
if eI has an isolated intersection with S and lies above S
κI = +2c,


−2(1 − c), if eI has an isolated intersection with S and lies below S
16

(3.23)

It then follows that, unless c = 1/2, the action of the area operator ÂS on a given
cylindrical function would change if we simply reverse the orientation on S (keeping the
orientation on Σ the same). Since this is physically inadmissible, we must have c = 1/2;
there is really no freedom in this part of the regularization procedure.
The second convention has to do with the overall numerical factor in the action, which
dictates the numerical coefficients in the symplectic structure. Here, we have adopted
the convention of [25] (see chapter 9) which makes the Poisson bracket {Aia (x), Ejb (y)} =
Gδab δji δ(x, y), enabling us to express Êia (x) as −iGh̄δ/δAia (x). (Had we rescaled the action
by 1/8π as is sometimes done, in our expressions, Newton’s constant G would be replaced
by 8πG.)
IV. EIGENVALUES AND EIGENVECTORS

This section is divided into three parts. In the first, we derive the complete spectrum
of the area operators, in the second, we extend the notion of spin networks, and in the
third, we use this extension to discuss eigenvectors.
A. The complete spectrum

We are now ready to calculate the complete spectrum of ÂS . Since ÂS is a sum of
square-roots of vertex operators which all commute with one another, the task reduces
to that of finding the spectrum of each vertex operator. Furthermore, since vertex operators map (C 2 ) cylindrical functions associated with any one graph to (C 0 ) cylindrical
functions associated with the same graph, we can begin with an arbitrary but fixed graph
γ. Consider then a vertex operator △S,v and focus on the edges of γ which intersect S
at v. Let us divide the edges in to three categories: let e1 , ..., ed lie ‘below’ S (‘down’),
ed+1 , ..., eu lie ‘above’ S (‘up’) and let eu+1 , ..., et be tangential to S. (As before, the labels
‘down’ and ‘up’ do not have an invariant significance; the orientation of S and of Σ enable
us to divide the non-tangential edges in to two parts and we just label one as ‘down’ and
the other as ‘up’.) Let us set:
(d) i

JS,v γ
(t) i

:= −i (X1i + ... + Xdi ),

i
+ ... + Xti ),
JS,v γ := −i (Xu+1

(u) i

JS,v γ
(d+u) i

JS,v

i
:= −i (Xd+1
+ ... + Xui ),

(u) i
(d) i
γ := JS,v + JS,v

(4.1)

where XIi is the operator defined in (3.11) assigned to the point v and an edge eI at v.
This notation is suggestive. We can associate with each edge e a particle with only a spin
degree of freedom. Then, the operators −iXei can be thought of as the ith component
(d) i

(u) i

(t) i

of angular momentum operators associated with that particle and JS,v , JS,v and JS,v as
the total ‘down’, ‘up’ and ‘tangential’ angular momentum operators at the vertex v.
By varying the graph, we thus obtain a family of operators. It is easy to check that
(d) i (t) i
(u) i
they satisfy the compatibility conditions and thus define operators JS,v , JS,v .JS,v and
17

(d+u) i

on Cyl. It is also easy to verify that they all commute with one another. Hence,
JS,v
one can express the vertex operator △S,v simply as:
(d) i

(d) i

(u) i

(u) i

− △S,v = (JS,v − JS,v )(JS,v − JS,v ) ;

(4.2)

because of the factor κ(I, J) in (3.21), the edges which are tangential do not feature in
this expression.
The evaluation of possible eigenvalues is now straightforward. It is simplest to express
△S,v as
(d)

(u)

(d+u) 2

− △S,v = 2(JS,v )2 + 2(JS,v )2 − (JS,v

) .

(4.3)

and, as in elementary text-books, go to the representation in which the operators
(d)
(u)
(d+u)
(JS,v )2 , (JS,v )2 and (JS,v )2 are diagonal. If we restrict now the operators to Cylγ associated to a fixed graph, it is obvious that the possible eigenvalues λ of △S,v are given
by:
λS,v = 2j (d) (j (d) + 1) + 2j (u) (j (u) + 1) − j (d+u) (j (d+u) + 1)

(4.4)

where j (d) , j (u) and j (d+u) are half integers subject to the usual condition:
j (d+u) ∈ {|j (d) − j (u) |, |j (d) − j (u) | + 1, ... , j (d) + j (u) }.

(4.5)

Returning to the total area operator, we note that the vertex operators associated
with distinct vertices commute. Although the sum (3.22) is not finite, restricted to any
graph γ and Cylγ it becomes finite. Therefore, the eigenvalues aS of ÂS are given by
i1
ℓ2P X h (d) (d)
aS =
2jα (jα + 1) + 2jα(u) (jα(u) + 1) − jα(d+u) (jα(d+u) + 1) 2
2 α

(4.6)

where α labels a finite set of points in S and the non-negative half-integers assigned to
each α are subject to the inequality (4.5). The question now is if all these eigenvalues are
actually attained, i.e., if, given any aS of the form (4.6), there are eigenvectors in Ho with
that eigenvalue. In Sec. 4.3, will show that the full spectrum is indeed realized on Ho .
The area operators map the subspace H̃o of gauge invariant elements of Ho to itself.
Hence we can ask for their spectrum on H̃o . We will see in Sec. 4.3 that further restrictions
can now arise depending on the topology of the surface S. There are three cases:
• i) The case when S is an open surface whose closure is contained in Σ. An example
is provided by the disk z = 0, x2 + y 2 < ro in R3 . In this case, there is no additional
condition; all aS of (4.6) subject to (4.5) are realized.
• ii) The case when the surface S is closed (∂S = ∅) and divides Σ into disjoint open
sets Σ1 and Σ2 (i.e., Σ = Σ1 ∪ S ∪ Σ2 with Σ1 ∩ Σ2 = ∅.) An example is given by:
18

Σ = R3 and S = S 2 . In this case, there is an a condition on the half integers jα(d)
and jα(u) that appear in (4.6) in addition to (4.5):
X

jα(d) = N,

and

α

X

jα(u) = N ′

(4.7)

α

for some integers N and N ′ .
• iii) The case when S is closed but not of type ii). An example is given by; Σ =
S 1 × S 1 × S 1 and S = S 1 × S 1 . In this case, the additional condition is milder:
X

(jα(d) + jα(u) ) = N

(4.8)

α

for some interger N.
Next, let us note some properties of this spectrum of ÂS . By inspection, it is clear
that the smallest eigenvalue is 0 and that the spectrum is unbounded from above. One
can ask for the ‘area gap’ i.e., the value of the smallest non-zero eigenvalue. On the full
Hilbert space Ho , it is given by:
√
3 2
o
aS =
ℓ .
(4.9)
4 P
This is a special case of the situation when there is only one term in the sum in (4.6) with
j (d) = 0, j (u) = j (d+u) = j. Then
aS =

ℓ2P q
j(j + 1) ,
2

(4.10)

and, if we choose j = 21 , we obtain the eigenvalue aoS . On the Hilbert space H̃o of gauge
invariant states, on the other hand, because of the constraints on the spectrum discussed
above, the area gap is sensitive to the topology of S:
√
3 2
ℓ if S is of type i)
aoS =
4√ P
2 2 2
ℓ if S is of type ii)
aoS =
4 P
2
aoS = ℓ2P if S is of type iii).
(4.11)
4
Another important feature of the spectrum is its behavior for large aS . As noted above,
the spectrum is discrete. However, an interesting question is if it approaches continuum
and, if so, in what manner. We will now show that as aS → ∞, the difference ∆aS
between aS and its closest eigenvalue satisfies the inequality
√
∆aS ≤ (ℓ2P /2)(ℓP / aS ) + O((ℓ2P /aS ))ℓ2P
19

(4.12)

and hence tends to zero (irrespective of√the topology of S). Specifically, given (odd)
integers M and N satisfying 1 ≤ M ≤ 2 N, we will obtain an eigenvalue aS,N,M of ÂS
such that for sufficiently large N, the bound (4.12) is explicitly realized. 7 Let us label
representations of SU(2) by their dimension, nα = 2jα + 1. Let nα , α = 1, ..., M be
P
N
(odd) integers such that M
α=1 nα = N, and |nα − M | < 2 Then, for each M, we have
from (4.10) an eigenvalue aS,N,M
aS,N,M =
=

M q
ℓ2P X
jα (ja + 1)
2 α=1
M
1
1
ℓ2P X
(nα −
) + O( ))
4 α=1
2nα
N

ℓ2P
M2
kM 2
1
(N −
+
+ O( ))
(4.13)
2
4
2N
N
N
√
for some integer k ∈ [1, M/2]. As M varies between 1 and
2
N , aS,N,M varies between
√
2
2
2
(ℓP /4)N and (ℓP /4)(N −2)+4k/N ≤ (ℓP /4)((N −2)+4/ N). Hence, given a sufficiently
large aS , there exist integers N, M satisfying the conditions given above such that ∆aS :=
|aS − an,m | satisfies the inequality (4.12).
We will conclude this discussion of the spectrum by providing an alternative form of
the expression (4.4) which holds for gauge invariant states. This form will be useful in
comparing our result with those obtained in the loop representation (where, from the
beginning, one restricts oneself to gauge invariant states.) Let Ψγ be a gauge invariant
cylindrical function on A. Then, the Gauss constraint implies that, at every vertex v of
γ, the following condition must hold:
=

X
I

XIi · Ψγ = 0,

(4.14)

where I labels the edges of γ at the vertex v and XIi is assigned to the point v and vertex
eI (see (3.11). Therefore,
(d) i

(t) i

(u) i

JS,v + JS,v + JS,v = 0.

(4.15)

Hence, one can now express the operator (4.3) in an alternate form,
(d)

(u)

(t)

− △S,v = 2(JS,v )2 + 2(JS,v )2 − (JS,v )2 .
7 This calculation

(4.16)

was motivated by the results of Bekenstein and Mukhanov [15] and our
estimate has an interesting implication on whether the Hawking spectrum is significantly altered
due to quantum gravity effects. Because the “level spacing” ∆aS goes to zero as aS goes to
infinity, the considerations of [15] do not apply to large black holes in our approach and there
is no reason to expect deviations from Hawking’s semi-classical results. On the other hand, for
small black-holes, –i.e., the final stages of evaporation– the estimate does not apply and one
expects transitions between area eigenstates to show significant deviations.

20

Furthermore, if it happens that γ has no edges which are tangential to S at v, (4.14)
implies:
(d)

(u)

− △S,v = 4(JS,v )2 = 4(JS,v )2 ,
whence the corresponding restricted eigenvalues of ÂS are given by
j are half-integers.

(4.17)
P 2q

ℓP j(j + 1), where

B. Extended spin networks

As a prelude to the discussion on eigenvectors, in this sub-section we will generalize
the constructions and results obtained in [9,10,27] on spin networks and spin network
states. The previous work showed that the spin network states provide us with a natural
orthogonal decomposition of the Hilbert space H̃o of gauge invariant states in to finite
dimensional sub-spaces. Here, we will extend those results to the space Ho .
We begin by fixing some terminology. Given N irreducible representations π1 , ..., πN of
N
SU(2), an associated invariant tensor cmk+1 ...mN m1 ...mk is a multi-linear map from kI=1 πI
N
to N
I=k+1 ΠI such that:
−1 nk
nk+1 ...nN
1
πk+1 (g)nmk+1
... πN (g)nmNN cmk+1 ...mN m1 ...mk π1 (g −1 )m
n1 ...nk , (4.18)
n1 ... πN (g )mk = c
k+1

for arbitrary g ∈ SU(2), where πI (g) is the matrix representing g in the representation
πI . An invariant tensor cm1 ...mk mk+1 ...mN is also called an intertwining tensor from the
representations π1 , ..., πk into πk+1 , ..., πN . All the invariant tensors are given by the
standard Clebsch-Gordon theory.
~ consisting of:
An extended spin network is an quintuplet (γ, ~π , ~c, ρ~, M)
i) A graph γ;
ii) A labeling ~π := (π1 , .., πN ) of the edges e1 , ..., eN of that graph γ with irreducible
and non-trivial representations of SU(2);
iii) A labeling ρ~ := (ρ1 , ..., ρV ) of the vertices v1 , ..., vV of γ with irreducible representations of SU(2), the constraint being that for every vertex vα the representation ρα
emerges in the decomposition of the tensor product of representations assigned by
~π to the edges intersecting vα ;
iv) A labeling ~c = (c1 , ..., cV ) of the vertices v1 , ..., vV of γ with certain invariant tensors,
namely, assigned to a vertex vα is an intertwining tensor cα from the representations
assigned to the edges coming to vα and ρα to the representations assigned to the
outgoing edges at vα ; and,
~ := (Mα )α=1,...,V = (M1 , ..., MV ) of the vertices v1 , ..., vV of γ which
v) A labeling M
assigns to every vertex vα a vector Mα in the representation ρα ;
21

It should be emphasized that every πI is necessarily non-trivial whereas ρα may be
trivial (i.e., 1-dimensional). In the gauge invariant context [9,10], ρα are all trivial whence
the items iii) and v) are unnecessary. The details of these conditions may seem somewhat
complicated but they are necessary to achieve the orthogonal decomposition (4.22).
From spin networks, we can construct states in Ho . An extended spin network state
Nγ,~c,M~ is simply a C ∞ cylindrical function on A constructed from an extended spin network (γ, ~π , ρ~, ~c, ~
M),
Nγ,~c,M~ (Ā) := [

N
O

I=1

πI (Ā(eI )) ⊗

V
O

α=1

Mα ] · [ ⊗Vα=1 cα ],

(4.19)

for all Ā ∈ A, where, as before, Ā(eI ) is an element of G associated with an edge eI
and ‘·’ stands for contracting, at each vertex vα of γ, the upper indices of the matrices
corresponding to all the incoming edges, the lower indices of the matrices assigned to
all the outgoing edges and the upper index of the vector Mα with all the corresponding
indices of cα . (We skip ~π and ρ~ in the symbol for the extended spin network function
because the intertwiners c contain this information.) Thus, for example, in the simple
case when the network has only two vertices, and all edges originate at the first vertex
and end at the second, Nγ,~c,M~ can be written out explicitly as:
Nγ,~c,M~ = π1 (Ā(e1 ))nm11 ... πN (Ā(eN ))nmNN M1m 1 M2m 2 c1m1 ...mN m′ 1 c2n1 ...nN m′ 2 ,
′

′

(4.20)

where indices mI , nI range over 1, ..., 2jI + 1 and m′ α ranges over 1, ..., 2jα+1 . Given any
spin network, (4.19) provides a function on A which is square-integrable with respect to
the measure µo . Given an extended spin network function on A, the the range R(γ) of
the associated graph γ is completely determined. Thus, two spin networks can define
the same function on A if one can be obtained from the other by subdividing edges and
changing arbitrarily the orientations.
It turns out that the spin network states provide a decomposition of the full Hilbert
space Ho into finite dimensional orthogonal sub-spaces (compare with [9,10]). Given a
triplet (γ, ~π , ρ~) defined by (i − iii) above, consider the vector space Hγ,~π,~ρ spanned by the
~ compatible with
spin network functions Nγ,~c,M~ given by all the possible choices for ~c, M
fixed labelings ~π , ρ~. Note that, according to the representation theory of compact groups,
every Hγ,~π,~ρ is a finite dimensional irreducible representation of G in Cyl. The group acts
there via
Nγ,~c,M~ (g −1 Āg) = Nγ,~c,M~ ′ (Ā),

M ′ α = ρα (g(vα ))Mα .

(4.21)

Modulo the obvious completions, we have the following orthogonal decomposition,
Ho =

M

R(γ),~
π ,~
ρ

Hγ,~π,~ρ

(4.22)

where, given a graph γ, the labelings ~π and ρ~ range over all the data defined above by
(i-iii) whereas for γ in the sum we take exactly one representative from every range of an
22

analytic graph in Σ. When ρ~ is trivial we skip ρ in Hγ,~π,~ρ . On Hγ,~π , the action of the gauge
transformations group G is trivial and we have the following orthogonal decomposition of
the Hilbert space of gauge invariant cylindrical functions,
H̃o =

M

R(γ),~
π

Hγ,~π ,

(4.23)

where we used the same conventions as in (4.22). Thus, we recover the result on spin
network states obtained in [9,10].
We conclude this sub-section with a general comment on spin network states. Consider
tri-valent graphs, i.e. graphs γ each vertex of which has three (or less) edges. In this case,
the standard Clebsch-Gordon theory implies that the the number of associated gauge
invariant spin network functions is severely limited: the corresponding sub-space of H̃o
is one dimensional. Hence, on the sub-space Cyl of H̃o corresponding only to tri-valent
graphs, the (normalized) spin network states provide a natural orthonormal basis. What is
remarkable is that these spin networks were first introduced by Penrose [28] already twenty
five years ago to probe the microscopic structure of geometry, although in a different
context. Because of the simplicity (and other attractive properties) of these Penrose spin
network states it is tempting to hope that they might suffice also in the present approach
to quantum gravity. Indeed, there were conjectures that the higher valent graphs are
physically redundant. However, it turns out that detailed physical considerations rule out
this possibility; quantum gravity seems to need graphs with unlimited complexity.
C. Eigenvectors

We are now ready to exhibit eigenvectors of the operators △S,v and ÂS for any of
the potential eigenvalues found in section 4.1. We will begin with the full, non-gauge
invariant Hilbert space Ho and consider an arbitrary surface S. Since Ho serves as the
(gravitational part) of the kinematical Hilbert space in theories in which gravity is coupled
to spinor fields, our construction is relevant to that case. In the second part of this subsection, we will turn to the gauge invariant Hilbert space H̃o and exhibit eigenvectors for
the restricted range of eigenvalues presented in section IV A.
(d)
Fix a point v in the surface S. We will investigate the action of the operators (JS,v )2 ,
(u)
(d+u)
(JS,v )2 , (JS,v )2 and △S,v on extended spin network states. Without loss of generality
we can restrict ourselves to graphs which are adapted to S and contain v as a vertex, say
v = v1 . Given a graph γ and labeling ~π and ρ~ of its edges and vertices by representations
of SU(2), we shall denote by Cv the linear space of the intertwining tensors which are
~ be an
compatible with ~π and ρ~ at v in the sense of section IV B. Let (γ, ~π , ρ~, ~c, M)
extended spin network and Nγ,~c,M~ be the corresponding state. As one can see from Eqs.
(4.1, 3.21), each of the four operators above is given by a linear combination (with constant
coefficients) of gauge invariant terms of the form bi1 ...iE XIi11 ...XIiEE where bi1 ...iE is a constant
tensor and all the Xs are associated with the point v and the edges which meet there.

23

On Nγ,~c,M~ the action of any operator of this type reduces to a linear operator ov acting
in Cv . More precisely, if O is any of the above operators, we have
ONγ,~c,M~ = Nγ,~c′ ,M~

(4.24)

~)
where Nγ,~c′ ,M~ is again an extended spin network state and the network (γ, ~π, ρ~, ~c′ , M
′
differs from the first one only in one entry of the labeling ~c corresponding to the vertex
v; c′ α = cα for all the vertices vα 6= v and c′ 1 = ov c1 . Consequently, the problem of
diagonalizing these operators reduces to that of diagonalizing a finite symmetric matrix
of ov . Note that a constant vector M assigned to v does not play any role in this action
and hence will just make eigenvectors degenerate.
(d)
(u)
(d+u)
In the case of operators (JS,v )2 , (JS,v )2 and (JS,v )2 , the (simultaneous) eigenstates are
given by the group representation theory. We can now spell out the general construction.
Let us fix a graph γ and arrange the edges that meet at v into three classes as before; e1 , ..., ed ; ed+1 , ...., eu ; eu+1 , ..., et . Let us also fix a labeling π1 , ..., πt of these edges
by irreducible, non-trivial representations of SU(2) and an irreducible (possibly trivial)
representation ρ which emerges in the decomposition of π1 ⊗ ... ⊗ πt . Consider now the
following ingredients:
a) Irreducible representations µ(d) , µ(u) and µ(d+u) ;
′

m

...m m′′

and c(u+d) m′ m′′ m associated, respecb) Invariant tensors c(d) m1 ...md m , c(u)d+1 u
tively, to the representations π1 , ..., πd , µ(d) , and to πd+1 , ..., πu , µ(u) and finally to
µ(d) , µ(u) , µ(d+u) ; and,
c) Invariant tensor c(t) n mu+1 ...mt m associated to µ(d+u) , πu+1 , ..., πt , ρ.
From this structure, construct the following invariant tensor,
′′

′

cm1 ...mt n := c(d) m1 ...md m c(u) md+1 ...mu m c(d+u) m′ m′′ n c(t) n mu+1 ...mt m ,

(4.25)

associated with the representations π1 , ..., πt , ρ. To obtain a non-trivial result in the end,
we need all the tensors to be non-zero. The existence of such tensors is equivalent to the
following two conditions on the data (a-c):
d) The representations µ(d) and µ(u) emerge respectively, in π1 ⊗...⊗πd and πd+1 ⊗...⊗πu ;
and,
e) the representation µ(d+u) emerges both in µ(d) ⊗ µ(u) and πu+1 ⊗ ... ⊗ πt ⊗ ρ.
~ ) such that
Finally, introduce an extended spin network (γ, ~π , ρ~, ~c, M
~π = (π1 , ..., πt , ..., πN ), ρ~ = (ρ, ρ2 , ..., ρV ), ~c = (c, c2 , ..., cV ),

(4.26)

the remaining entries being arbitrary. Then, the corresponding state Nγ,~c,M~ is an eigen(d)

(u)

(d+u) 2

vector of the operators (JS,v )2 , (JS,v )2 , and (JS,v
24

) with the eigenvalues j (d) (j (d) + 1),

j (u) (j (u) + 1) and j (d+u) (j (d+u) + 1), respectively, where the half integers j (d) , j (u) and
j (d+u) correspond to the representations µ(d) , µ(u) and µ(d+u) . Hence, this Nγ,~c,M~ is also
an eigenvector of △S,v with the eigenvalue (4.4,4.5). It is obvious, that for any triple of
representations µ(d) , µ(u) and µ(d+u) satisfying the constraint (4.5) there exists an extended
spin network (4.26).
This construction provides all eigenvectors of △S,v . The key reason behind this completeness is that, given any choice of π1 , ..., πd , ..., πu , ..., πt and ρ as above, the invariant
tensors which can be written in the form (4.25) with any µ(d) , µ(u) , and µ(d+u) span the
entire space Cv of invariant tensors at v compatible with that data. Since the defining
formula for a spin network function (4.19) is linear with respect to every component of
~ ) it suffices to decompose the component c1 of ~c at
~c, given any spin network (γ, ~π, ρ~, ~c, M
v1 = v into invariant tensors of the form (4.25) in any manner to obtain a decomposition
of the corresponding spin network function into a linear combination of extended spin network functions given by (4.25,4.26). The desired result now follows from the orthogonal
decomposition of Ho in to the extended spin network subspaces.
Let us now turn to the operator ÂS . A basis of eigen vectors can be obtained in the
following way. Since the area operator can be expressed in terms of and commutes with
(d)
(u)
(d+u)
(JS,v )2 , (JS,v )2 , and (JS,v )2 at any point v in S, we can simultaneously diagonalize all
these operators. Because for every graph the area operator preserves the subspace of spinnetwork states associated with that graph and for two different graphs the spin network
spaces spaces are orthogonal, it is enough to look for eigen vectors for an arbitrary graph
~ as in section 4.2, at every vertex v contained
γ. Given a graph γ, labelings ~π , ρ~ and M
in the surface S choose a basis in the space Cv consisting of invariant tensors of the form
~ and
(4.25). The set of the spin network functions (4.19) constructed by varying γ, ~π , ~ρ, M
o
picking at each vertex v an element of the basis in Cv constitutes a basis in H . (If we
restrict the labelings to ρ consisting only of the trivial representations, then the resulting
set of spin network states provide a basis for the space H̃o of gauge invariant functions.)
Each of such states is automatically an eigenvector of ÂS with eigenvalue (4.6).
We conclude the first part of this sub-section with a simple example of an eigen vector
of the area operator with eigenvalue aS , where aS is any real number satisfying (4.6,4.6).
• Example. Suppose (jα(d) , jα(u) , jα(d+u) ), α = 1, ..., W , is a finite set of triples of half
integers which for every α satisfy (4.5)). Rather than repeating the construction a)e) above step by step, we will specify only the simplest of the resulting (extended)
spin-networks. In S choose W distinct points vα , α = 1, ..., W . To every point
vα assign two finite analytic curves ed,α and eu,α starting at vα , not intersecting
S otherwise, and going in opposite directions of S. For a graph γ take the graph
{ed,1 , eu,1 , ..., ed,W , eu,W }, the vertices being the intersection points vα and the ends
of the edges ed,α and eu,α (the curves being chosen such that the points vα are the
only intersections). Label each edge ed,α with the irreducible representation πd,α
corresponding to a given jα(d) and every edge eu,α with the irreducible representation
πu,α defined by jα(u) . That defines a labeling ~π of γ. (The absence of edges et,α is
equivalent to introducing these edges in any manner and assigning to them the trivial
representations.) To define a labeling ρ~ at the vertices vα , assign to every vertex
25

vα a representation ρα defined by a given jα(d+u) . Next, to each vertex vα assign an
d mu m associated to the triple of representations (π
invariant tensor cm
d,α , πu,α , ρα )
α
introduced above. The construction of a spin-network is completed by: (i) labeling
that end point of each ed,α and, respectively, of eu,α which is not contained in S, with
the representation ρd,α := πd,α and, respectively, ρu,α := πu,α ; (ii) labeling of these
ends of the edges with the unique invariants corresponding to the representations
~ of vertices
µ(d),α , ρ(d),α or, respectively, to µ(u),α , ρ(u),α ; (iii) defining a labeling M
which can be chosen arbitrarily, provided at a vertex vα the associated vector Mα
belongs to the representation ρ(d+u),α and at an endpoint of either of the edges ed/u,α
the associated Md/u,α belongs to ρ(d/u),α .
As we noted in section 2, the Hilbert space Ho is the quantum analog of the full phase
space. Now, in the classical theory, the imposition of the Gauss constraint on the phase
space does not restrict the allowed values of the functional AS of (2.2). It is therefore of
interest to see if this feature persists in the quantum theory: Is the spectrum of ÂS on
the full Ho the same as that on its gauge invariant sub-space H̃o ? As was indicated in
Sec. 4.1, the answer is in the affirmative only if the surface is open. If S is closed, there
are restrictions on the spectrum which depend on topological properties of S embedded
in Σ. The second part of this section is devoted to this issue. As indicated in Sec. 4.1,
we need to consider three separate cases.
Case i): ∂S 6= ∅ (and ∂S ⊂ Σ).
We will modify the spin-network of the above Example in such a way as to obtain
a gauge-invariant eigenstate without changing the eigen value of the area operator. Let
γ and the labeling ~π be the ones defined in the Example. To each vertex vα assign one
more edge et,α beginning in vα and contained in S. Label it by the representation πt,α
corresponding to a given jα(d+u) at that point. The labeling ρ~ is now taken to be trivial.
To every point vα assign, as in the Example, an invariant tensor cα associated now to the
representations (πd,α , πu,α , πt,α ). Every extension of this data to a spin-network will define
a spin-network state which is gauge invariant at each of the points vα . Now, we need to
define a closed spin-network which contains all the edges ed,α , eu,α , et,α and provides an
extension for the labelings already introduced. For this, we use a key property of the
area operator associated to a surface with boundary: vertices which lie on ∂S do not
contribute to the action of the operator. Therefore, we can simply extend every edge et,α
within S to the boundary of S. Denote the intersection point with ∂S by vt,α . Next, for
every α we extend (in a piecewise analytic way) the edges ed,α and eu,α such that they end
at vt,α . The extended edges form a graph γ ′ = {e′ d,1 , e′ u,1 , e′ t,1 , ..., e′ d,W , e′ u,W , e′ t,W }. Let
us label each primed edge by the irreducible representation assigned before to the edge
it is an extension of. This defines a labeling π~′ of γ ′ . Finally, assign to each new vertex
vt,α the non-zero invariant tensor c′ t,α mu ,md ,mt (which is unique up to rescaling) associated
to the triplet of representations (πd,α , πu,α , πt,α ). This completes the construction of a
gauge invariant extension of a spin-network state constructed in the Example. Thus, for
an open surface, the spectrum of the area operator ÂS on H̃o is the same as that on Ho .
26

Case ii): ∂S = ∅ and S splits Σ in to two open sets.
In this case we can not repeat the above construction: Since S has no boundary, if
additional vertices are needed to close the open spin-network, they must now lie in S and
can make unwanted contributions to the action of the area operator. Consequently, there
(d)
(u)
are further restrictions on the possible eigenvalues of the operators (JS,v )2 , (JS,v )2 and
(d+u)
(JS,v )2 . To see this explicitly, consider arbitrary spin-network state (γ, ~π , ~c) given by
the construction a)-e) of Sec 4.3. Let {v1 , ..., vW } be a set of the vertices of γ contained
in the surface S. Graph γ can be split into three graphs: γt which is contained in S,
γu which is contained in a one side of S in Σ and γd contained in the other side of S
in Σ. The only intersection between the two parts is the set {v1 , ..., vW } of vertices of
γ which are contained in S. Let γr be one of the parts of γ (i.e. r = d or r = u or
r = t). According to the construction a)-e), the labelings ~π and ~c define naturally on γr
an extended spin-network. The labeling of the edges of γr by irreducible representations
is defined just by the restriction of ~π to γr . The labeling of the vertices by irreducible
representations and invariant tensors is defined in the following way. For the vertices of
γr which are not contained in S, the labelings are taken to be again the restriction of ρ~
(which are all trivial) and ~c. To a vertex vα contained in S we assign the representation
corresponding to a given jr,α and the invariant tensor cr defined in b) (for r = d, u) and
c) (for r = t) of the construction a) - e). Finally, we complete it by arbitrary nonzero
~ of the vertices with vectors in appropriate representations. The construction
labeling M
a) - e) guarantees that a resulting extended spin-network state is not zero. Now, for an
~ ′ ) we have the following “fermion conservation law”:
extended spin-network (γ ′ , ~π′ , ρ~′ , ~c′ , M
X

jρ′ (v) = N

(4.27)

v

for some integer N, where v runs through the vertices of a graph γ ′ and each jρ(v) is
an half-integer corresponding to an representation assigned to v by ρ~′ . In our case we
therefore obtain the restriction:
X

jr,α = Nr

(4.28)

α

for r = d, u, d + u which gives the conditions (4.7) listed in Sec 4.1. (In fact either two of
the above conditions imply the third one).
The conditions (4.28) are also sufficient for an eigen vector to exist. Suppose we are
given a set of half integers as in the Example above, which satisfy the restriction (4.28).
A statement “converse to the fermion conservation law” is that for any set {v1 , ..., vW } of
points in S and any assignment vα 7→ jα where jα are non-negative half integer satisfying
~ ′ ) such that every vα is its
(4.28), there exists an extended spin-network (γ ′ , ~π ′ , ρ~′ , ~c′ , M
index, jα corresponds to the representation assigned to vα by ρ~′ , and for every vertex
v 6= vα , α = 1, ..., W , of γ ′ , the representation assigned by ρ~′ is trivial. From extended
spin-networks provided by the above statement it is easy to construct an eigen vector of
the corresponding eigen values.

27

Case iii): ∂S = ∅ but S does not split Σ.
The only difference between this case and the previous one is that now a graph γ
representing an eigen vector is cut by S into two components: γt contained in S and
γd+u which corresponds to the rest of γ. Since γd+u can be now connected by the same
arguments as above, we prove that a necessary and sufficient condition for an eigen vector
to exists is (4.28) imposed only on the half integers jα(d+u) .
V. DISCUSSION

In section 1, we began by formulating what we mean by quantization of geometry:
Are there geometrical observables which assume continuous values on the classical phase
space but whose quantum analogs have discrete spectra? In the last two sections, we
answered this question in the affirmative in the case of area operators. In the next paper
in this series we will show that the same is true of other (‘3-dimensional’ ) operators. The
discreteness came about because, at the microscopic level, geometry has a distributional
character with 1-dimensional excitations. This is the case even in semi-classical states
which approximate classical geometries macroscopically [12,22].
We will conclude this paper by examining our results on the area operators from
various angles.
1. Inputs: The picture of quantum geometry that has emerged here is strikingly
different from the one in perturbative, Fock quantization. Let us begin by recalling the
essential ingredients that led us to the new picture.
This task is made simpler by the fact that the new functional calculus provides the
degree of control necessary to distill the key assumptions. There are only two essential
R
inputs. The first assumption is that the Wilson loop variables, Tα = Tr P − exp α A,
should serve as the configuration variables of the theory, i.e., that the Hilbert space of
(kinematic) quantum states should carry a representation of the C ⋆ -algebra generated
by the Wilson loop functionals on the classical configuration space A/G. The second
assumption singles out the measure µ̃o . In essence, if we assume that Êia be represented by
−ih̄δ/δAia , the ‘reality conditions’ lead us to the measure µ̃o [10]. Both these assumptions
seem natural from a mathematical physics perspective. However, a deeper understanding
of their physical meaning is still needed for a better understanding of the overall situation
8
.
Compactness of SU(2) plays a key role in all our considerations. Let us therefore
briefly recall how this group arose. As explained in [17,19], one can begin with the ADM

8 In particular, in the standard spin-2 Fock representation, one uses quite a different algebra

of configuration variables and uses the flat background metric to represent it. It then turns
out that the Wilson loops are not represented by well-defined operators; our first assumption is
violated. One can argue that in a fully non-perturbative context, one can not mimic the Fock
space strategy. Further work is needed, however, to make this argument water-tight.

28

phase-space in the triad formulation, i.e., with the fields (Eia , Kai ) on Σ as the canonical
variables, and then make a canonical transformation to a new pair (Aia := (Γia + Kai ), Eia ),
where Kai is the extrinsic curvature and Γia , the spin-connection of Eia . Then, Aia is an
SU(2) connection, the configuration variable with which we began our discussion in section 2. It is true that, in the Lorentzian signature, it is not straightforward to express
the Hamiltonian constraint in these variables; one has to introduce an additional step,
e.g., a generalized Wick transform [18]. However, this point is not directly relevant in
the discussion of geometric operators which arise at the kinematical level. (See, however,
below). Finally, we could have followed the well-known strategy [25] of simplifying constraints by using a complex connection CAia := (Γia − iKai ) in place of the real Aia . The
internal group would then have been complexified SU(2). However, for real (Lorentzian)
general relativity, the kinematic states would then have been holomorphic functionals of
C i
Aa . To construct this representation rigorously, certain technical issues still need to be
overcome. However, as argued in [18], in broad terms, it is clear that the results will be
equivalent to the ones obtained here with real connections.
2. Kinematics versus Dynamics: As was emphasized in the main text, in the classical
theory, geometrical observables are defined as functionals on the full phase space; these
are kinematical quantities whose definitions are quite insensitive to the precise nature of
dynamics, presence of matter fields, etc. Thus, in the connection dynamics description,
all one needs is the presence of a canonically conjugate pair consisting of a connection and
a (density weighted) triad. Therefore, one would expect the result on the area operator
presented here to be quite robust. In particular, they should continue to hold if we bring
in matter fields or extend the theory to super-gravity.
There is, however, a subtle caveat: In field theory, one can not completely separate
kinematics and dynamics. For instance, in Minkowskian field theories, the kinematic field
algebra typically admits an infinite number of inequivalent representations and a given
Hamiltonian may not be meaningful on a given representation. Therefore, whether the
kinematical results obtained in any one representation actually hold in the physical theory
depends on whether that representation supports the Hamiltonian of the model. In the
present case, therefore, a key question is whether the quantum constraints of the theory
can be imposed meaningfully on H̃o .9 Results to date indicate (but do not yet conclusively
prove) that this is likely to be the case for general relativity. The general expectation is
that this would be the case also for a class of theories such as super-gravity, which are
‘near’ general relativity. The results obtained here would continue to be applicable for
this class of theories.
3. Dirac Observable: Note that ÂS has been defined for any surface S. Therefore,
these operators will not commute with constraints; they are not Dirac observables. To
obtain a Dirac observable, one would have to specify S intrinsically, using, for example,

9 Note that this issue arises in any representation once a sufficient degree of precision is reached.

In geometrodynamics, this issue is not discussed simply because generally the discussion is rather
formal.

29

matter fields. In view of the Hamiltonian constraint, the problem of providing an explicit
specification is extremely difficult. However, this is true already in the classical theory. In
spite of this, in practice we do manage to specify surfaces and furthermore compute their
areas using the standard formula from Riemannian geometry which is quite insensitive
to the details of how the surface was actually defined. Similarly, in the quantum theory,
if we could specify a surface S intrinsically, we could compute the spectrum of ÂS using
results obtained in this paper.
4. Comparison: Let us compare our methods and results with those available in
the literature. Area operators were first examined in the loop representation. The first
attempt [12] was largely exploratory. Thus, although the key ideas were recognized, the
very simplest of loop states were considered and the simplest eigenvalues were looked
at; there was no claim of completeness. In the present language, this corresponds to
restricting oneself to bi-valent graphs. In this case, apart from an overall numerical factor
(which does, however, have some conceptual significance) our results reduce to that of
[12].
A more complete treatment, also in the framework of the loop representation, was
given in [13]. It may appear that our results are in contradiction with those in [13] on
two points. First,
the final result there was that the spectrum of the area operator is
q
2 P
given by ℓP
jl (jl + 1), where jl are half-integers, rather than by (4.6). However, the
reason behind this discrepancy is rather simple: the possibility that some of the edges at
any given vertex can be tangential to the surface was ignored in [13]. It follows from our
remark at the end of section 4.2 that, given a surface S, if one restricts oneself to only to
graphs in which none of the edges are tangential, our result reduces to that of [13]. Thus,
the eigenvalues reported in [13] do occur in our spectrum. It is just that the spectrum
reported in [13] is incomplete. Second, it is suggested in [13] that, as a direct consequence
of the diffeomorphism covariance of the theory, local operators corresponding to volume
(and, by implication, area) elements would be necessarily ill-defined (which makes it
necessary to by-pass the introduction of volume (and area) elements in the regularization
√
procedure). This assertion appears to contradict our finding that the area element d
gS
is a well-defined operator-valued distribution which can be used to construct the total
area operator ÂS in the obvious fashion. We understand [29], however, that the intention
of the remark in [13] was only to emphasize that the volume (and area) elements are
‘genuine’ operator-valued distributions; thus there is no real contradiction.
The difference in the methodology is perhaps deeper. First, as far as we can tell, in [13]
only states corresponding to trivalent graphs are considered in actual calculations. Thus,
even the final expression (Eq (48) in [13]) of the area operator after the removal of the
regulator is given only on tri-valent graphs. similarly, their observation that every spin
network is an eigenvector of the area operator holds only in the tri-valent case. Second, for
the limiting procedure which removes the regulator to be well-defined, there is an implicit
assumption on the continuity properties of loop states (spelled out in detail in [30]). A
careful examination shows that this assumption is not satisfied by the states of interest
and hence an alternative limiting procedure, analogous to that discussed in section 3.1, is
needed. Work is now progress to fill this gap [29]. Finally, not only is the level of precision
30

achieved in the present paper significantly higher but the approach adopted is also more
systematic. In particular, in contrast to [13], in the present approach, the Hilbert space
structure is known prior to the introduction of operators. Hence, we can be confident
that we did not just omit the continuous part of the spectrum by excising by fiat the
corresponding sub-space of the Hilbert space.
Finally, the main steps in the derivation presented in this paper were sketched in the
Appendix D of [10]. The present discussion is more detailed and complete.
5. Manifold versus Geometry: In this paper, we began with an orientable, analytic,
3-manifold Σ and this structure survives in the final description. As noted in footnote
1, we believe that the assumption of analyticity can be weakened without changing the
qualitative results. Nonetheless, a smoothness structure of the underlying manifold will
persist. What is quantized is ‘geometry’ and not smoothness. Now, in 2+1 dimensions,
using the loop representation one can recast the final description in a purely combinatorial
fashion (at least in the so-called ‘time-like sector’ of the theory). In this description, at
a fundamental level, one can avoid all references to the underlying manifold and work
with certain abstract groups which, later on, turn out to be the homotopy groups of the
‘reconstructed/derived’ 2-manifold (see, e.g., section 3 in [31]). One might imagine that,
if and when our understanding of knot theory becomes sufficiently mature, one would also
be able to get rid of the underlying manifold in the 3+1 theory and introduce it later as
a secondary/derived concept. At present, however, we are quite far from achieving this.
In the context of geometry, however, a detailed combinatorial picture is emerging.
Geometrical quantities are being computed by counting; integrals for areas and volumes
are being reduced to genuine sums. (However, the sums are not the ‘obvious’ ones,
often used in approaches that begin by postulating underlying discrete structures. In the
computation of area, for example, one does not just count the number of intersections;
there are precise and rather intricate algebraic factors that depend on the representations
of SU(2) associated with the edges at each intersection.) It is striking to note that, in the
same address [3] in which Riemann first raised the possibility that geometry of space may
be a physical entity, he also introduced ideas on discrete geometry. The current program
comes surprisingly close to providing us with a concrete realization of these ideas.
Acknowledgments
Discussions with John Baez, Bernd Bruegman, Don Marolf, Jose Mourao, Roger
Picken, Thomas Thiemann, Lee Smolin and especially Carlo Rovelli are gratefully acknowledged. Additional thanks are due to Baez and Marolf for important information
they communicated to JL on symmetric tensors in the representation theory. This work
was supported in part by the NSF Grants PHY93-96246 and PHY95-14240, the KBN
grant 2-P302 11207 and by the Eberly fund of the Pennsylvania State University. JL
thanks the members of the Max Planck Institute for their hospitality. Both authors acknowledge support from the Erwin Schrodinger International Institute for Mathematical
Sciences, where the final version of this paper was prepared.

31

REFERENCES
[1] A. Trautman, Differential Geometry for Physicists. Stony Brook Lectures., Napoli
1984, Bibliopolis
[2] A. Trautman, Rep. Math. Phys. 1, p.29 (1970).
[3] B. Riemann, Über die Hypothesen, welche der Geometrie zugrunde liegen (1854).
[4] A. Ashtekar and C.J. Isham, Class. & Quan. Grav. 9, 1433 (1992).
[5] A. Ashtekar and J. Lewandowski, “Representation theory of analytic holonomy C ⋆
algebras”, in Knots and quantum gravity, J. Baez (ed), (Oxford University Press,
Oxford 1994); J. Math. Phys. 36, 2170 (1995).
[6] J. Baez, Lett. Math. Phys. 31, 213 (1994); “Diffeomorphism invariant generalized measures on the space of connections modulo gauge transformations”, hepth/9305045, in the Proceedings of the conference on quantum topology, D. Yetter
(ed) (World Scientific, Singapore, 1994).
[7] D. Marolf and J. M. Mourão, Commun. Math. Phys. 170, 583 (1995).
[8] A. Ashtekar and J. Lewandowski, J. Geo. & Phys. 17, 191 (1995).
[9] J. Baez, “Spin network states in gauge theory”, Adv. Math. (in press); “Spin networks
in non-perturbative quantum gravity,” pre-print gr-qc/9504036.
[10] A. Ashtekar, J. Lewandowski, D. Marolf, J. Mourão and T. Thiemann, J. Math. Phys.
36, 6456 (1995).
[11] A. Ashtekar, J. Lewandowski, D. Marolf, J. Mourão and T. Thiemann, J. Funct.
Analysis, 135, 519 (1996).
[12] A. Ashtekar, C. Rovelli, L. Smolin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 237 (1992) .
[13] C. Rovelli and L. Smolin, Nucl. Phys. B442, 593 (1995).
[14] C. Rovelli, L. Smolin, Nucl. Phys. B331, 80 (1990).
[15] J. Bekenstein and V.F. Mukhanov, Spectroscopy of quantum black holes, pre-print
gr-qc/9505012.
[16] S. Carlip, Statistical mechanics and black-hole entropy, preprint gr-qc/9509024.
[17] A. Ashtekar, Polymer geometry at Planck scale and quantum Einstein’s equations,
CGPG-95/11-5 pre-print, hepth 9601054.
[18] T. Thiemann, Reality conditions inducing transforms for quantum gauge field theory
and quantum gravity, CGPG-95/11-4 pre-print.
[19] A. Ashtekar, A Generalized Wick transform for gravity CGPG-95/12-1 pre-print.
[20] J. Baez and S. Sawin, Functional integration on spaces of connections, q-alg/9507023;
J. Lewandowski and T. Thiemann (in preparation)
[21] J. Kijowski, Rep. Math. Phys., 11, 97 (1976).
[22] A. Ashtekar and L. Bombelli (in preparation)
[23] J. Iwasaki and C. Rovelli, Int. J. Modern. Phys. D1, 533 (1993); Class. Quant. Grav.
11, 2899 (1994).
[24] A. Ashtekar, in Mathematics and General Relativity, ed J. Isenberg (American Mathematical Society, Providence, 1987); Phys. Rev. D36, 1587 (1987).
[25] A. Ashtekar, Lectures on Non-perturbative Canonical Gravity, Notes prepared in collaboration with R.S. Tate (World Scientific, Singapore, 1991).
[26] B. Bruegman and J. Pullin, Nucl.Phys., B390, 399 (1993).
32

[27] C. Rovelli, L. Smolin, Spin networks and quantum gravity CGPG-95/4-4 pre-print;
T. Thiemann, Inverse loop transform, CGPG-95/4-1.
[28] R. Penrose, in Quantum Theory and Beyond, ed. T. Bastin (cambridge University
Press, 1971).
[29] C. Rovelli, private communication to AA
[30] L. Smolin, in Quantum Gravity and Cosmology, ed J. Pérez-Mercader et al (World
Scientific, Sigapore, 1992).
[31] A. Ashtekar, in Gravitation and Quantizations, ed B. Julia and J. Zinn-Justin (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1995).

33

