QMW-94-30
R/94/33
hep-th/9410167
October, 1994

arXiv:hep-th/9410167v2 13 Jan 1995

Unity of Superstring Dualities

C.M. Hull
Physics Department, Queen Mary and Westfield College,
Mile End Road, London E1 4NS, U.K.
and
P. K. Townsend
DAMTP, University of Cambridge,
Silver Street, Cambridge CB3 9EW, U.K.

ABSTRACT
The eﬀective action for type II string theory compactiﬁed on a six torus is
N = 8 supergravity, which is known to have an E7 duality symmetry. We show
that this is broken by quantum eﬀects to a discrete subgroup, E7 (Z), which contains
both the T-duality group O(6, 6; Z) and the S-duality group SL(2; Z). We present
evidence for the conjecture that E7 (Z) is an exact ‘U-duality’ symmetry of type
II string theory. This conjecture requires certain extreme black hole states to be
identiﬁed with massive modes of the fundamental string. The gauge bosons from
the Ramond-Ramond sector couple not to string excitations but to solitons. We
discuss similar issues in the context of toroidal string compactiﬁcations to other
dimensions, compactiﬁcations of the type II string on K3 ×T 2 and compactiﬁcations

of eleven-dimensional supermembrane theory.

1. Introduction
String theory in a given background can be formulated in terms of a sum
over world-sheet ﬁelds, (super-) moduli and topologies of a world-sheet sigmamodel with the background spacetime as its target space. Diﬀerent backgrounds
may deﬁne the same quantum string theory, however, in which case they must be
identiﬁed. The transformations between equivalent backgrounds generally deﬁne
a discrete group and such discrete gauge symmetries are referred to as duality
symmetries of the string theory. An example is T-duality, which relates spacetime
geometries possessing a compact abelian isometry group (see [1] and references
therein). The simplest case arises from compactiﬁcation of the string theory on
a circle since a circle of radius R deﬁnes the same two-dimensional quantum ﬁeld
theory, and hence the same string theory, as that on a circle of radius α′ /R. Tdualities are non-perturbative in the sigma-model coupling constant α′ but valid
order by order in the string coupling constant g. Some string theories may have
additional discrete symmetries which are perturbative in α′ but non-perturbative
in g. An example is the conjectured S-duality of the heterotic string compactiﬁed
on a six-torus [2,3,4]. In this paper we investigate duality symmetries of the type II
string compactiﬁed to four dimensions and present evidence for a new ‘U-duality’
symmetry which uniﬁes the S and T dualities and mixes sigma-model and string
coupling constants.
Consider a compactiﬁed string for which the internal space is an n-torus with
constant metric gij and antisymmetric tensor bij . The low-energy eﬀective ﬁeld
theory includes a spacetime sigma model whose target space is the moduli space


O(n, n)/ O(n) × O(n) of the torus, and the constants gij and bij are the expecta-

tion values of the n2 scalar ﬁelds. There is a natural action of O(n, n) on the moduli
space. In general this takes one string theory into a diﬀerent one but a discrete
O(n, n; Z) subgroup takes a given string theory into an equivalent one. This is the

T-duality group of the toroidally-compactiﬁed string and the true moduli space of
the string theory is the moduli space of the torus factored by the discrete T-duality
2

group. There is a generalization to Narain compactiﬁcations on the ‘(p,q)-torus’
T (p, q) for which the left-moving modes of the string are compactiﬁed on a ptorus and the right-moving ones on a q-torus [5]. In this case the moduli space


is O(p, q)/ O(p) × O(q) factored by the T-duality group O(p, q; Z). The T (6, 22)
case is relevant to the heterotic string compactiﬁed to four dimensions which has
O(6, 22; Z) as its T-duality group. At a generic point in the moduli space the effective ﬁeld theory is N = 4 supergravity coupled to 22 abelian vector multiplets,
giving a total of 28 abelian vector gauge ﬁelds [6] with gauge group U(1)28 . It follows from the compactness of the full gauge group for all 28 vector gauge ﬁelds that
any electric or magnetic charges are quantized. The eﬀective ﬁeld theory has an
SL(2; R) × O(6, 22) invariance of the equations of motion which, due to the charge

quantization and the fact that states carrying all types of charge can be found
in the spectrum, is broken to the discrete subgroup SL(2; Z) × O(6, 22; Z). The

O(6, 22; Z) factor extends to the T-duality group of the full string theory. It has
been conjectured that the SL(2; Z) factor also extends to a symmetry of the full
string theory [3]. This is the S-duality group of the heterotic string. It acts on the
dilaton ﬁeld Φ and the axion ﬁeld ψ (obtained by dualizing the four-dimensional
two-form gauge ﬁeld bµν that couples to the string) via fractional linear transformations of the complex scalar ψ + ie−Φ and on the abelian ﬁeld strengths by a
generalized electric-magnetic duality. One of the SL(2; Z) transformations interchanges the electric and magnetic ﬁelds and, when ψ = 0, takes Φ to −Φ which,

since the expectation value of eΦ can be identiﬁed with the string coupling constant
g, takes g to 1/g, and so interchanges strong and weak coupling.
Consider now the compactiﬁcation of the type IIA or type IIB superstring
to four dimensions on a six-torus. The low-energy eﬀective ﬁeld theory is N = 8
supergravity [7], which has 28 abelian vector gauge ﬁelds and 70 scalar ﬁelds taking


values in E7(7) / SU(8)/Z2 . The equations of motion are invariant under the

action of E7(7) [7], which contains SL(2; R) × O(6, 6) as a maximal subgroup.

We shall show that certain quantum mechanical eﬀects break E7(7) to a discrete

subgroup which we shall call E7 (Z), and this implies a breaking of the maximal
3

SL(2; R) × O(6, 6) subgroup to SL(2; Z) × O(6, 6; Z). The O(6, 6; Z) factor extends

to the full string theory as the T-duality group and it is natural to conjecture that
the SL(2; Z) factor also extends to the full string theory as an S-duality group.

In fact, we shall present evidence for the much stronger conjecture that the full
E7 (Z) group (to be deﬁned below) extends to the full string theory as a new
uniﬁed duality group, which we call U-duality. U-duality acts on the abelian gauge
ﬁelds through a generalized electromagnetic duality and on the 70 scalar ﬁelds,
the constant parts of which can each be thought of as a coupling constant of the
theory. The zero-mode of the dilaton is related to the string coupling g, while
21 of the scalar zero-modes are the moduli of the metric on the 6-torus, and the
others parameterise the space of constant anti-symmetric tensor gauge ﬁelds on the
six-torus. U-duality implies that all 70 coupling constants are on a similar footing
despite the fact that the standard perturbative formulation of string theory assigns
a special rôle to one of them.
Whereas T-duality is known to be an exact symmetry of string theory at each
order in the string coupling constant g, the conjectured S-duality and U-duality are
non-perturbative and so cannot be established within a perturbative formulation
of string theory. However, it was pointed out in [4] in the context of the heterotic
string that there are a number of quantities for which the tree level results are
known to be, or believed to be, exact, allowing a check on S-duality by a perturbative, or semi-classical, calculation. We shall show that U-duality for the type II
string passes the same tests.
First, for compactiﬁcations of the type II string that preserve at least N = 4
supersymmetry, the low energy eﬀective ﬁeld theory for the massless modes is a
supergravity theory whose form is determined uniquely by its local symmetries
and is therefore not changed by quantum corrections. Duality of the string theory
therefore implies the duality invariance of the equations of motion of the supergravity theory. This prediction is easily checked because the symmetries of the N ≥ 4
supergravity/matter theories have been known for some time. In particular, the

equations of motion of N = 8 supergravity are U-duality invariant. Another quan4

tity that should be, and is, duality invariant is the set of values of electric and
magnetic charges allowed by the Dirac-Schwinger-Zwanziger quantization condition. Third, the masses of states carrying electric or magnetic charges satisfy a
Bogomolnyi bound which, for the compactiﬁcations considered here, is believed to
be unrenormalized to arbitrary order in the string coupling constant. Duality invariance of the string theory requires this bound to be duality invariant. For soliton
states the Bogomolnyi bound can be found from a classical bound on ﬁeld conﬁgurations of the eﬀective supergravity theory carrying electric or magnetic charges
that generalizes the bound obtained in [8] for Maxwell-Einstein theory. We present
this bound for N = 8 supergravity and show that it is U-duality invariant. Fourth,
the spectrum of ‘Bogomolnyi states’ saturating the Bogomolnyi bound should also
be duality invariant. These states include winding and momentum modes of the
fundamental string and those found from quantization of solitons. We shall assume
that soliton solutions of the type II string can be identiﬁed with those of its eﬀective N = 8 supergravity theory, and these, as we shall see, include various types
⋆

of extreme black hole .
One of the main concerns of this paper will be the Bogomolnyi states of the
type II string theory that break half the supersymmetry. As we shall see, the soliton states in this category arise from quantization of a particular class of extreme
black hole solution of N = 8 supergravity. It is essentially automatic that all
soliton states of the type II string fall into representations of the U-duality group
because this is a symmetry of the equations of motion of which the solitons are
†

solutions . A similar argument can be made for solitons of the heterotic string; for
example, extreme black hole solutions of the low-energy ﬁeld theory corresponding
to the heterotic string ﬁt into SL(2, Z) representations [10]. There are two points
to bear in mind, however. First, a duality transformation not only produces new
soliton solutions from old but also changes the vacuum, as the vacuum is parame⋆ See [9] for a discussion of the interpretation of extreme black holes as solitons
† They also fall into supermultiplets because of the fermion zero modes in the presence of an
extreme black hole [11]
5

terised by the scalar expectation values and these change under duality. We shall
assume, as in [4], that the new soliton state in the new vacuum can be continued back to give a new soliton state in the old vacuum with duality transformed
electric and magnetic charges; this is certainly possible at the level of solutions
of the low energy eﬀective action, since the extreme black hole solutions depend
analytically on the scalar expectation values. Combining U-duality transformations with analytic continuations of the scalar ﬁeld zero-modes in this way gives an
E7 (Z) invariance of the spectrum of soliton states in a given vacuum. (Note that
whereas U-duality preserves masses, combining this with a scalar zero-mode continuation gives a transformation which changes masses and so is not an invariance
of the Hamiltonian.) Second, the four-dimensional metrics of many extreme black
hole solitons are only deﬁned up to a conformal rescaling by the exponential of a
scalar ﬁeld function that vanishes at spatial inﬁnity. While the ‘Einstein’ metric
is duality invariant, other metrics in the same conformal equivalence class will not
be. In general one should therefore think of duality as acting on conformal equivalence classes of metrics and the issue arises as to which metric within this class
is the physically relevant one. As we shall see, for the solutions considered here
each conformal class of metrics contains one that is (i) either completely regular
or regular outside and on an event horizon and (ii) such that its spatial sections
interpolate between topologically distinct vacua. The extreme black hole solutions
corresponding to these metrics might reasonably be interpreted as solitons of the
theory.
We now encounter an apparent contradiction with U-duality, and with Sduality, of the type II string theory because the fundamental string excitations
include additional Bogomolnyi states which apparently cannot be assigned to duality multiplets containing solitons because the soliton multiplets are already complete. The only escape from this contradiction is to make the hypothesis that
the fundamental string states have already been counted among the soliton states.
In order for this to be possible there must be soliton states carrying exactly the
same quantum numbers as the fundamental Bogomolnyi states. This is indeed
6

the case. The idea that particles with masses larger than the Planck mass, and
hence a Compton wavelength less than their Schwarzschild radius, should be regarded as black holes is an old one [12,13], and it has recently been argued that
Bogomolnyi states in the excitation spectrum of the heterotic string should be
identiﬁed with extreme electrically-charged dilaton black holes [14,15]. For the
heterotic string, approximate solutions of the low-energy eﬀective action include
extreme black holes and self-gravitating BPS monopoles [16,17], and it is believed
that these correspond to Bogomolnyi solitons of the heterotic string [4]. Any magnetically charged soliton will have an electrically charged soliton partner generated
by the action of the Z2 electromagnetic duality subgroup of S-duality. Now, if
the full string theory is S-duality invariant, and this Z2 subgroup acts on an electrically charged fundamental string state to give a magnetically charged soliton,
as argued for the heterotic string in [4], then this fundamental string state must
be identiﬁed with the corresponding electrically charged soliton. We shall return
to these points later but it is worth noting here that solitons of the low-energy
eﬀective N = 4 or N = 8 supergravity theory ﬁt into representations of the S × T

or U duality as these are symmetries of the supergravity equations of motion, and
this is true irrespective of whether the duality symmetry is actually a symmetry of
the full heterotic or type II string theory.
For compactiﬁcations of ten-dimensional string theories one expects solitons
of the eﬀective four-dimensional theory to have a ten-dimensional origin. For the
type II string we are able to identify the four dimensional solitons that break
half the supersymmetry of N = 8 supergravity as six-torus ‘compactiﬁcations’
of the extreme black p-branes of either IIA or IIB ten-dimensional supergravity
[18,19,20,21,22]. We note that, in this context, the Bogomolnyi bound satisﬁed by
these states can be seen to arise from the algebra of Noether charges of the eﬀective
world-volume action [23]. Remarkably, the solitonic states that are required to be
identiﬁed with fundamental string states are precisely those which have their tendimensional origin in the string soliton or extreme black 1-brane solution, which
couples to the same two-form gauge ﬁeld as the fundamental string. This suggests
7

that we should identify the fundamental ten dimensional string with the solitonic
string. This is consistent with a suggestion made in [24], for other reasons, that
the four-dimensional heterotic string be identiﬁed with an axion string.
A similar analysis can be carried out for non-toroidal compactiﬁcation. A
particularly interesting example is compactiﬁcation of the type II superstring on
K3 × T 2 [25] for which the eﬀective four-dimensional ﬁeld theory turns out to be
identical to the eﬀective ﬁeld theory of the T 6 -compactiﬁed heterotic string, and
in particular has the same SL(2, Z) × O(6, 22; Z) duality group. Furthermore, the

spectrum of extreme black hole states is also the same. This raises the possibility

that the two string theories might be non-perturbatively equivalent, even though
they diﬀer perturbatively. Such an equivalence would clearly have signiﬁcant implications.
Finally we consider similar issues in the context of the 11-dimensional supermembrane [26]. This couples naturally to 11-dimensional supergravity [27] and hence
to N = 8 supergravity after compactiﬁcation on T 7 and to N = 4 supergravity
coupled to 22 vector multiplets after compactiﬁcation on K3 × T 3 [28]. At present

it is not known how to make sense of a quantum supermembrane, so there is little
understanding of what the massive excitations might be. However, some progress
can be made using the methods sketched above for the string. We shall show
that, if the elementary supermembrane is identiﬁed with the solitonic membrane
solution [29] of 11-dimensional supergravity and account is taken of the solitonic
ﬁvebrane solution [30], the results of this analysis for the four-dimensional theory
are exactly the same as those of the type II string.

8

2. Charge Quantization and the Bogomolnyi Bound
Consider the four-dimensional Lagrangian
L=

√

−g




1 µνρσ
1
1
µν J
I
J
i µ j
1
R − 2 gij (φ)∂µ φ ∂ φ − mIJ (φ)F Fµν − ε
aIJ (φ)Fµν Fρσ
4
4
8
(2.1)

for space-time 4-metric gµν , scalars φi taking values in a sigma-model target space
I .
M with metric gij (φ), and k abelian vector ﬁelds AIµ with ﬁeld strengths Fµν

The scalar functions mIJ + iaIJ are entries of a positive deﬁnite k × k Hermitian

matrix. The bosonic sector of all supergravity theories without scalar potentials or
non-abelian gauge ﬁelds can be put in this form. We shall be interested in those
cases for which the equations of motion are invariant under some symmetry group
G, which is necessarily a subgroup of Sp(2k; R) [31] and an isometry group of M.

Of principal interest here are the special cases for which M is the homogeneous
space G/H where H is the maximal compact subgroup of G. These cases include

many supergravity theories, and all those with N ≥ 4 supersymmetry. For N = 4

supergravity coupled to m vector multiplets k = 6 + m, G = SL(2; R) × O(6, m)

and H = U(1) × O(6) × O(m). For N = 8 supergravity k = 28, G = E7(7) and
H = SU(8). For the ‘exceptional’ N = 2 supergravity [32], k = 28, G = E7(−25)
and H = E6 × U(1).
Deﬁning
J
Gµν I = mIJ ⋆F Jµν + aIJ Fµν

(2.2)

I = 1ε
ρσI , the AI ﬁeld equations and Bianchi identities can be
where ⋆Fµν
µ
2 µνρσ F

written in terms of the the 2k-vector of two-forms
FI

F=

GI

!

(2.3)

as simply dF = 0. The group G acts on the scalars through isometries of M and
on F as F → ΛF where Λ ∈ G ⊆ Sp(2k; R) is a 2k × 2k matrix preserving the
9

2k × 2k matrix
Ω=

0
−

0

!

(2.4)

An alternative way to represent the G/H sigma model is in terms of a G-valued
ﬁeld V (x) which transforms under rigid G-transformations by right multiplication
and under local H transformations by left multiplication
V (x) → h(x)V (x)Λ−1

h∈H , Λ∈G

(2.5)

The local H-invariance can be used to set V ∈ G/H. Note that F̄ ≡ V F is Ginvariant. In most cases of interest, the scalar coset space can be parameterised

by the complex scalars zIJ = aIJ + imIJ which take values in a generalised upperhalf-plane (mIJ is positive deﬁnite) and the group G acts on zIJ by fractional
linear transformations. (This can be seen for N = 8 supergravity as follows. In the
symmetric gauge [7], the coset is parameterised by a scalar yIJ which transforms
under fractional linear transformations under G. However, zIJ is related to yIJ
by a fractional linear transformation, zIJ = i( + ȳ)/( − ȳ), so that z in turn
transforms under G by fractional linear transformations. Similar results follow for
N < 8 supergravities by truncation.)
We now deﬁne the charges
I

Q =

I

⋆F

I

1
pI =
2π

Σ

I

Σ

F

I

qI =

I

GI

(2.6)

Σ

as integrals of two-forms over a two-sphere Σ at spatial inﬁnity. The charges pI
and qI are the magnetic charges and the Noether electric charges, respectively.
The charges QI are the electric charges describing the 1/r 2 fall-oﬀ of the radial
I , and incorporate the shift in the electric
components of the electric ﬁelds, F0r

charge of a dyon due to non-zero expectation values of axion ﬁelds [33]. Indeed, if
10

the scalars φi tend to constant values φ̄i at spatial inﬁnity, then
qI = mIJ (φ̄)QJ + aIJ (φ̄)pJ .

(2.7)

The charges (pI , qI ) can be combined into a 2k-vector
Z=

I

F=

Σ

pI
qI

!

(2.8)

from which it is clear that Z → ΛZ under G.
The Dirac-Schwinger-Zwanziger (DSZ) quantization condition (with h̄ = 1) for
two dyons with charge vectors Z and Z ′ is
Z T ΩZ ′ ≡ pI qI′ − p′I qI = ν

(2.9)

for some integer ν. This quantization condition is manifestly G-invariant as G ⊆
Sp(2k; R). However, it has implications for the quantum theory only if there exist

both electric and magnetic charges. If, for example, there are no magnetic charges
of one type then (2.9) places no constraint on the values of the corresponding
electric charge. For the cases of interest to us here, we will show that there exist
electric and magnetic charges of all types. We shall now proceed with our analysis
of the general case assuming all types of charge exist and this, together with the
quantization condition (2.9), implies that the Noether electric charges qI lie in some
lattice Γ and that the magnetic charges pI lie in the dual lattice Γ̃. The group
G is therefore broken to the discrete sub-group G(Z) which has the property that
a vector Z ∈ Γ ⊕ Γ̃ is taken to another vector in the same self-dual lattice. The

subgroup of Sp(2k) preserving the lattice is Sp(2k; Z), so that the duality group is
G(Z) = G ∩ Sp(2k; Z) .

(2.10)

For compact G, G(Z) is a ﬁnite group while for non-compact G it is an inﬁnite
discrete group. If we choose a basis for the ﬁelds AI so that the electric charges,
11

and hence the magnetic charges, are integers, then the lattice Γ ⊕ Γ̃ is preserved
by integer-valued matrices, so that Sp(2k; Z) consists of integer-valued 2k × 2k

matrices preserving Ω, and G(Z) is also represented by integer-valued 2k × 2k

matrices. Note that the group G(Z) is independent of the geometry of the lattice,

as any two lattices Γ, Γ′ are related by a GL(k, R) transformation, so that the
corresponding discrete groups G(Z), G′ (Z) are related by GL(k, R) conjugation
and so are isomorphic. For N = 4 supergravity coupled to 22 vector multiplets,
G(Z) is precisely the S × T duality group SL(2; Z) × O(6, 22; Z) of the toroidally-

compactiﬁed heterotic string, which was observed previously to be the quantum

symmetry group of this eﬀective ﬁeld theory [4]. For N = 8 supergravity G(Z) is
a discrete subgroup of E7(7) which we shall call E7(7) (Z) and abbreviate to E7 (Z).
It can be alternatively characterized as the subgroup of Sp(56; Z) preserving the
invariant quartic form of E7(7) . From the explicit form of this invariant given in
[7], it is straightforward to see that E7 (Z) contains an SL(8, Z) subgroup. We also
have
E7 (Z) ⊃ SL(2; Z) × O(6, 6; Z) ,

(2.11)

so that E7 (Z) contains the T-duality group of the toroidally-compactiﬁed type II
string. The minimal extension of the S-duality conjecture for the heterotic string
would be to suppose that the SL(2; Z) factor extends to an S-duality group of
the type II string, but it is natural to conjecture that the full discrete symmetry
group is the much larger U-duality group E7 (Z). E7 (Z) is strictly larger than
SL(2; Z) × O(6, 6; Z), as it also contains an SL(8, Z) subgroup. In the next section

we shall verify some predictions of U-duality for the spectrum of states saturating
a gravitational version of the Bogomolnyi bound, i.e. the ‘Bogomolnyi states’.
However, before turning to the spectrum we should verify that the Bogomolnyi
bound is itself U-duality invariant, since otherwise a U-duality transformation could
take a state in the Bogomolnyi spectrum to one that is not in this spectrum.
Consider ﬁrst the cases of pure N = 4 supergravity (without matter coupling)
and N = 8 supergravity, for which M = G/H and k = N(N − 1)/2. We deﬁne
12

Ymn = tImn (q̄I + ip̄I ) where (p̄I , q̄I ) are the components of the 2k-vector Z̄ = V Z

and V is the constant asymptotic value of the G-valued ﬁeld V at spatial inﬁnity.

Here m, n = 1, . . . , N and tImn = −tInm are the matrices generating the vector

representation of SO(N). The Ymn appear in a global supersymmetry algebra as
central charges [34,8,9,35] and this allows a derivation of a Bogomolnyi bound. The
anti-symmetric complex N ×N matrix Ymn has N/2 complex skew eigen-values λa ,
a = 1, . . . , N/2 and the bound on the ADM mass of the Maxwell-Einstein theory

[8] can be generalized to [35]
MADM ≥ max|λa |

(2.12)

Since Z → ΛZ and V → V Λ−1 under G, it follows that Z̄ and the λa are invariant

under duality transformations, so the bound (2.12) is manifestly G-invariant. In the
quantum theory this bound translates to a bound on the mass of the corresponding
quantum state. Similar results apply to the case of N = 4 super-matter coupled

to supergravity, with the diﬀerence that tImn = −tInm are now certain scalar-ﬁeld

dependent matrices that ‘convert’ the SO(6, m) index I to the SO(6) composite
index mn. Nevertheless, the charges λa remain duality-invariant.
If the moduli of all the eigenvalues are equal, |λa1 | = |λa2 | = . . . = |λaN/2 |, then

the bound (2.12) is equivalent to

MADM ≥

r

2
N

q

|Z̄|2

(2.13)

where
|Z̄|2 =

1
mn
= GIJ p̄I p̄J + GIJ q̄I q̄J
|λa |2 = Y mn Y
2
a

X

(2.14)

and GIJ = 12 tImn tJmn is the identity matrix for pure supergravity, but is scalar
dependent for the the matter-coupled N = 4 theory. However, in the general case
of diﬀerent eigenvalues, the bound (2.14) is strictly weaker than (2.12). If MADM
is equal to the modulus of r of the eigenvalues λa , MADM = |λa1 | = |λa2 | =
13

. . . = |λar |, for some r with 0 ≤ r ≤ N/2, then the soliton with these charges
spontaneously breaks the N original supersymmetries down to r supersymmetries,

so that for solitons for which r = N/2 precisely half of the N supersymmetries are
preserved and the bound (2.12) is equivalent to (2.14). The duality invariance of
the bound (2.14) for N = 4 was previously pointed out in [3,4].

3. Spectrum of Bogomolnyi states
There are many massive states in the spectrum of toroidally-compactiﬁed string
theories. The masses of those which do not couple to any of the U(1) gauge ﬁelds
cannot be calculated exactly. This is also true in general of those that do couple
to one of the U(1) gauge ﬁelds but the masses of such particles are bounded by
their charges, as just described. It is believed that the masses of string states
that saturate the bound are not renormalized for theories with at least N = 4
supersymmetry. If this is so then these masses can be computed exactly. Such
‘Bogomolnyi states’ arise in the theory from winding and Kaluza-Klein modes of
the fundamental string, and from quantization of non-perturbative soliton solutions
of the string theory. The latter include extreme black holes and, for the heterotic
string, self-gravitating BPS monopoles.
For generic compactiﬁcations of both heterotic and type II strings there are
28 abelian gauge ﬁelds and so a possible 56 types of electric or magnetic charge.
We shall identify solitons of the eﬀective supergravity theory carrying each type
of charge, thereby justifying the quantization condition on these charges. These
solitons are various types of extreme black holes. Initially, at least, we shall be
interested in solitons carrying only one type of charge, in which case we should
consistently truncate the supergravity theory to one with only one non-zero ﬁeld
strength, F . The coeﬃcients of the F 2 terms can then be expressed in terms of a
scalar ﬁeld σ and a pseudoscalar ﬁeld ρ (which are two functions of the φi ) such
that the truncated ﬁeld theory has an action of the form


Z
1 −2aσ
1
1
µν
µν
4 √
R+ e
Fµν F + ρFµν ⋆F + L(σ, ρ)
S = d x −g
4
4
4
14

(3.1)

where L(σ, ρ) is the lagrangian for a scalar sigma-model and a is a constant. One
can choose a ≥ 0 without loss of generality since a is changed to −a by the ﬁeld

redeﬁnition σ → −σ. For every value of a the equations of motion of (3.1) admit

extreme multi-black hole solutions [36], parameterised by the asymptotic values
of σ, ρ, which are arbitrary integration constants. There is an intrinsic ambiguity
in the metric of the a 6= 0 extreme black hole solutions because a new metric

can be constructed from the canonical metric (appearing in the action (3.1)) by
a conformal rescaling by a power of eσ . The general metric in this conformal
equivalence class will not have an interpretation as a ‘soliton’ in the sense for which
the a = 0 extreme Reissner-Nordstrom (RN) black hole is a soliton. One feature
that is generally expected from a soliton is that it interpolate between diﬀerent
vacua: in the RN case these are the Minkowski spacetime near spatial inﬁnity
and the Robinson-Bertotti vacuum down an inﬁnite Einstein-Rosen ‘throat’. If we
require of the a 6= 0 extreme black holes that they have a similar property then one

must rescale the canonical metric dŝ2 by e2aσ , after which one ﬁnds, for vanishing
asymptotic values of σ and ρ, the solution
ds2 = e2aσ dŝ2
2(1−a2 )

(1 + a2 )M  (1+a2 ) 2 
(1 + a2 )M −2 2
=− 1−
dr + r 2 dΩ22
dt + 1 −
r
r
a2


2
(1 + a )M 1+a2
,
ρ=0
e−aσ = 1 −
r

(3.2)

where M is the ADM mass and dΩ22 is the metric on the unit 2-sphere. When
a = 1 and σ is the dilaton ﬁeld this rescaling of the canonical metric is exactly
what is required to get the so-called ‘string metric’, so that the a = 1 black holes
have a natural interpretation as string solitons. This might make it appear that
the rescaling of the canonical metric by e2aσ is inappropriate to string theory when
a 6= 1, but it must be remembered that the scalar ﬁeld σ is not necessarily the

dilaton but is, in general, a combination of the dilaton and modulus ﬁelds of the
√
torus and gauge ﬁelds. Indeed, it was shown in [37] that for the a = 3 black
holes this combination is such that the eﬀective rescaling is just that of (3.2). For
15

any value of a this metric has an internal inﬁnity as r → (1 + a2 )M for constant

t. For a < 1 the surface r = (1 + a2 )M is an event horizon, but this event horizon
is regular only if 2(1 − a2 )/(1 + a2 ) is an integer, which restricts the values of a
√
less than unity to a = 0 or a = 1/ 3. The a = 0 case is the extreme RN black
hole for which the soliton interpretation is widely accepted. The signiﬁcance of the
√
a = 1/ 3 case has been explained in [38]. For a ≥ 1 the surface r = (1 + a2 )M

is at inﬁnite aﬃne parameter along any geodesic so one might admit all values of
a ≥ 1. On the other hand, the relevance of geodesic completeness is not clear in

this context so one might still wish to insist that 2(1 − a2 )/(1 + a2 ) be an integer

so that the null surface r = (1 + a2 )M is regular, in which case only the further
√
values of a = 1 and a = 3 can be admitted. Curiously, the values
√
1
a = 0, √ , 1, 3
3

(3.3)

which we ﬁnd in this way by demanding that the solution (3.2) is a bone fide
soliton also arise from truncation of N = 8 supergravity. The possibility of the
values a = 0 and a = 1 is guaranteed by the existence of consistent truncations of
N = 8 supergravity to N = 2 and N = 4 supergravity respectively. The possibility
√
of the values a = 3 and a = √1 is guaranteed by the existence of a consistent
3

truncation of the maximal ﬁve-dimensional supergravity to simple ﬁve-dimensional
supergravity since the subsequent reduction to four dimensions yields just these
values.
Consider ﬁrst the a = 0, electric and magnetic extreme RN black holes. Given
any one such black hole with integral charge, an inﬁnite number can be generated
by acting with G(Z), and these will include black holes carrying each of the 56
types of charge [35], and this is already suﬃcient to show that the continuous
duality group E7(7) is broken to a discrete subgroup. These solutions break 3/4
of the supersymmetry in the N = 4 theories and 7/8 of the supersymmetry in
the N = 8 case. For the remainder of the paper, we shall restrict ourselves to
solitons which break half the supersymmetry, and the only extreme black hole
16

solutions of this type are those with a =

√

3. This follows from consideration

of the implications of supersymmetry for the moduli space of multi-black hole
solutions. This multi-soliton moduli space is the target space for an eﬀective sigma
model describing non-relativistic solitons [39]. This sigma model must have 8
supersymmetries for solitons of a four-dimensional N = 4 supergravity theory that
break half the supersymmetry, and this implies that the moduli space is hyperKahler. Similarly, the moduli space for multi-solitons of N = 8 supergravity
that break half the supersymmetry is the target space for a sigma model with
16 supersymmetries, and this implies that the moduli space is ﬂat. However, the
√
moduli space of multi-black hole solutions is ﬂat if and only if a = 3 [40,41],
so only these extreme black holes can be solutions of N = 8 supergravity that
break half the supersymmetry. An alternative characterization of these extreme
black holes is as ‘compactiﬁcations’ of the extreme black p-brane solitons of the tendimensional supergravity theory, which are known to break half the supersymmetry
[42]. It follows that the moduli space of these solutions must be ﬂat and what
evidence there is [43] conﬁrms this prediction. This ten-dimensional interpretation
of the solitons discussed here will be left to the following section where it will also
become clear that they carry combinations of all 28 + 28 electric and magnetic
charges associated with the 28 U(1) gauge ﬁelds.
This moduli space argument shows, incidentally, that whereas the ﬂatness of
the moduli space for solitons that break half the supersymmetry is protected by
supersymmetry for N = 8 supergravity, this is not so for N = 4 theories. There is
then no reason to expect the moduli space metric of extreme black hole solitons of
the exact heterotic string theory (to all orders in α′ and g) to be ﬂat. Indeed, the
√
a = 3 extreme black holes, which have a ﬂat moduli space, are only approximate
solutions of the heterotic string and are expected to receive higher order corrections.
Furthermore, if BPS-type monopoles were to occur in the type II string theory, a
possibility that is suggested by the occurrence of non-abelian gauge groups in some
versions of the compactiﬁed type II string [44], they would have to break more than
half the supersymmetry as their moduli space is not ﬂat. This is in accord with
17

the fact that the four-dimensional type II strings of ref. [44] have at most N = 4
supersymmetry, so that solitons of these theories saturating a Bogomolnyi bound
would have less than N = 4 supersymmetry. This provides further justiﬁcation for
our assumption that the solitons of the toroidally compactiﬁed type II string that
break half the N = 8 supersymmetry are those of the eﬀective N = 8 supergravity
theory.
The complete set of soliton solutions of a supergravity theory ﬁll out multiplets
of the duality group G(Z), as mentioned in the introduction. We shall now explain
this in more detail. Flat four-dimensional space-time with the scalar ﬁelds φi taking
constant values, φi0 , is a vacuum solution of the supergravity theory parameterised
by these constants. The duality group acts non-trivially on such vacua as it changes
the φi0 . The solitons for which the scalar ﬁelds tend asymptotically to the values
φi0 provide the solitonic Bogomolnyi states about the vacuum state |φ0 >. A
G(Z) transformation takes a Bogomolnyi state in this vacuum with charge vector

Z to another Bogomolnyi state with charge vector Z ′ and equal mass but in a

new vacuum |φ′0 >. As in [4], it will be assumed that one can smoothly continue

from φ′ 0 to φ0 without encountering a phase transition, to obtain a state with

the charge vector Z ′ , but a diﬀerent mass in general, about the original vacuum

|φ0 >. This assumption seems reasonable because the extreme black hole solutions

depend analytically on the constants φi0 . We thus obtain a new Bogomolnyi soliton
solution about the original vacuum but with a G(Z) transformed charge vector.
The spectrum of all the Bogomolnyi states obtained in this way is G(Z) invariant
by construction. In particular, the number of these Bogomolnyi states with charge
vector Z will be the same as the number with charge vector Z ′ whenever Z is

related to Z ′ by a G(Z)-transformation.

In addition to the Bogomolnyi states that arise from solitons, there are also
the electrically charged Bogomolnyi states of the fundamental string. These states
are purely perturbative and for the type II string they consist of the Kaluza-Klein
(KK) and winding modes of the string. If they are also to ﬁt into multiplets of the
duality group they must have magnetically charged partners under duality, and
18

these should be non-perturbative, i.e. solitonic. The soliton duality multiplets are,
however, already complete for the reason just given. In order to have duality of the
string theory we must therefore identify the fundamental states with electrically
charged solitonic states. We shall see in the next section how this identiﬁcation
must be made.
It might be thought that all electrically charged soliton states should have an
equivalent description in terms of fundamental states. This is presumably true of
the heterotic string since there are fundamental string states carrying each of the 28
types of electric charge and these are related by the T-duality group O(6, 22; Z).
In contrast, the fundamental modes of the type II string carry only 12 of the
possible 28 electric charges, because the 16 Ramond-Ramond (RR) U(1) gauge
ﬁelds couple to the string through their ﬁeld strengths only. The 12 string-mode
electric charges are related by the T-duality group O(6, 6; Z) of the type II string.
It would be consistent with S and T-duality to suppose that there are no charged
states coupling to the 16 (RR) gauge ﬁelds, but this would not be consistent with
U-duality, as we now show.
Recall that an n-dimensional representation of G gives an action of G on Rn
which restricts to an action of G(Z) on the lattice Zn . For both the heterotic
and type II strings, the charge vector Z transforms under G as a 56-dimensional

representation. For the heterotic string, G = SL(2; R)×O(6, 22) and Z transforms

according to its irreducible (2, 28) representation. This has the decomposition
(2, 28) → (2, 12) + 16 × (2, 1)

(3.4)

in terms of representations of SL(2; R) × O(6, 6). This is to be compared with the

type II string for which G = E7(7) and Z transforms according to its irreducible

56 representation, which has the decomposition

56 → (2, 12) + (1, 32)

(3.5)

under SL(2; R) × O(6, 6). In both cases there is a common sector corresponding to
the (2, 12) representation of SL(2; R) × O(6, 6), plus an additional 32-dimensional
19

representation corresponding, for the heterotic string, to the charges for the additional U(1)16 gauge group and, for the type II strings, to the charges for the
Ramond-Ramond (RR) sector gauge ﬁelds. It is remarkable that the latter ﬁt
into the irreducible spinor representation of O(6, 6). These decompositions of the
56 representation of G induce corresponding decompositions of representations of
G(Z) into representations of SL(2; Z) × O(6, 6; Z) on the charge lattice Z56 . In
particular, U-duality requires the 16 +16 electric and magnetic charges of the RR
sector to exist and to transform irreducibly under the action of the T-duality group
O(6, 6; Z), and we conclude that all charges in the RR sector must be carried by
solitons. We shall later conﬁrm this.

4. p-Brane interpretation of Bogomolnyi solitons
We have seen that the solitons of toroidally compactiﬁed superstrings ﬁt into
representations of the duality group G(Z). Our concern here will be to identify
states that break half the supersymmetry and carry just one of the 56 types of
electric or magnetic charge. We shall call such states for which the charge takes
the minimum value ‘elementary’; acting on these with the duality group G(Z) will
generate a lattice of charged states. Here we wish to show how the elementary
solitons arise from extreme black p-brane solitons of the ten dimensional eﬀective
supergravity theory. These may be of electric or magnetic type. Electric p-brane
solitons give electrically charged solitons of the four-dimensional dimensionally
reduced ﬁeld theory, while magnetic ones give magnetic monopoles, provided we
use the form of the four-dimensional supergravity theory that comes directly from
dimensional reduction without performing any duality transformations on the oneform gauge ﬁelds (although we convert two-form gauge ﬁelds to scalar ﬁelds in the
usual way). If we had chosen a diﬀerent dual form of action, the solutions would
be the same, but some of the electric charges would be viewed as magnetic ones,
and vice versa. This form of the action is manifestly invariant under T-duality: for
the heterotic string, the action is the O(6, 22)-invariant one given in [45], which is
20

related to the one of [46] by a duality transformation, and for the type II string, it
is a new O(6, 6)-invariant form of the N = 8 supergravity action which is related
to the SL(8, R)-invariant Cremmer-Julia action [7] by a duality transformation.
An extreme p-brane soliton of the ten-dimensional low-energy ﬁeld theory has
a metric of the form [21]
ds2 = A(r)[−dt2 + dxi dxi ] + B(r)dr 2 + r 2 dΩ28−p

(4.1)

where xi (i = 1, . . . , p) are p ﬂat Euclidean dimensions, dΩ28−p is the metric on an
(8 − p)-sphere, r is a radial coordinate, t is a time coordinate and A(r), B(r) are
two radial functions that tend to unity as r → ∞. These solitons couple either to

an anti-symmetric tensor gauge ﬁeld Ar of rank r = 7−p, in which case the p-brane
is magnetically charged and F = dA is proportional to the (8 − p)-sphere volume

form ǫ8−p , or one of rank r = p − 3, in which case the brane is electric and ⋆F is

proportional to ǫ8−p . In some cases, the p-brane solutions will have corrections of
higher order in α′ , but some of the solutions correspond to exact conformal ﬁeld
theories.
We shall be interested in four dimensional solitons obtained by ‘compactifying’
p-brane solitons on the six-torus. Compactiﬁcation on T p is straightforward since
one has only to ‘wrap’ the p-brane around the p-torus, which is achieved by making
the appropriate identiﬁcations of the xi coordinates. If p < 6 a soliton in four
dimensions can then be found by taking periodic arrays on T (6−p) and making a
⋆

periodic identiﬁcation . For example [47], a ﬁve-brane can be wrapped around a
ﬁve-torus in six ways giving rise to six types of ﬁve-dimensional soliton and these
yield six types of black-hole solitons in four dimensions on taking periodic arrays.
Similarly, to ‘compactify’ a 0-brane (i.e. a 10-dimensional black hole) on a sixtorus one ﬁrst introduces a 6-dimensional periodic array of such black holes and
⋆ Alternatively, since the solution of extreme black p-branes always reduces to the solution
of the Laplace equation in the transverse space, one has only to solve this equation on
R3 × T (6−p) instead of R(9−p) to find solitons of the four-dimensional theory.
21

periodically identiﬁes. Instead of wrapping all p dimensions of a p-brane to obtain
a point-like 0-brane in 3+1 dimensions, one can wrap p − q dimensions to obtain
a q-brane soliton in 3+1 dimensions; however, in what follows we shall restrict
ourselves to 0-brane solitons in 4 dimensions.
The bosonic sectors of the ten-dimensional eﬀective ﬁeld theories of the heterotic and type IIA and type IIB superstrings each include a metric, gM N , antisymmetric tensor gauge ﬁeld, bM N , and a dilaton ﬁeld Φ. We shall ﬁrst discuss
this common sector of all three theories and then turn to the additional sectors
characteristic of each theory. We expect the solutions we describe to be exact solutions of the classical type II theory, and their masses to be unrenormalized in the
quantum theory, but for the heterotic string they are only approximate solutions
(to lowest order in α′ ) of the low energy ﬁeld theory.
Dimensional reduction of the common (g, b, Φ) sector on T 6 yields 6 KaluzaKlein abelian gauge ﬁelds (gµi + · · ·) coming from gM N and another 6 abelian

gauge ﬁelds (bµi + · · ·) coming from bM N . It is straightforward to identify the

magnetically-charged solitons associated with the KK gauge ﬁelds. These are the
KK monopoles [48], consisting of the product of a self-dual Taub-NUT instanton,

with topology R4 , with a 5-torus and a time-like R. As this is the the product of
a ﬁve-metric with a ﬁve-torus, this can also be viewed as a ﬁvebrane solution of
†

the ten-dimensional theory wrapped around a ﬁve-torus. There are six types of
KK monopoles in four dimensions, one for each of the six KK gauge ﬁelds, because
the ﬁvebrane can be wrapped around the six-torus in six diﬀerent ways. As four√
dimensional solutions the KK monopoles are extreme black holes with a = 3, as
expected from the moduli space argument of the previous section. The elementary
magnetically charged solitons associated with the bµi gauge ﬁelds can be identiﬁed
with the six possible ‘compactiﬁcations’ of the extreme black ﬁvebrane [20,19] of the
ten dimensional (g, b, Φ) theory. We shall refer to these as abelian H-monopoles;
† For fixed r, t, the solution has topology S 3 × T 5 , and the S 3 can be regarded as a Hopf
bundle of S 1 over S 2 . Thus locally it is S 2 × T 6 , so that this solution might also be thought
of as a twisted 6-brane.
22

they were ﬁrst given in [49] and have been discussed further in [50,47,22]. It is
straightforward to check directly that the KK monopoles and the H-monopoles are
indeed related by T-duality, as expected [51,52]. Note that we have not included
KK modes of the 5-brane, i.e. conﬁgurations in which the 5-brane has momentum
in some of the toroidal directions, as these either lead to extended objects in four
dimensions, or to localised solitons that carry more than one type of charge and
so are not elementary.
The KK and abelian H monopoles have electric duals.

These electrically

charged solitons have their ten-dimensional origin in the extreme black string [18]
of the (g, b, Φ) theory, which is dual [53, 54,55] to the extreme black ﬁve-brane.
The 6 electric duals to the abelian H-monopoles are found by wrapping the solitonic string around the 6-torus, i.e. the 6 winding modes of the solitonic string.
The electric duals of the KK monopoles come from Kaluza Klein modes of the
1-brane, i.e. conﬁgurations in which the solitonic string has momentum in the
toroidal directions. They can be thought of as pp-waves travelling in the compactiﬁed directions [11]. These 6 + 6 elementary electrically charged solitons couple to
the 6 + 6 KK and bµi gauge ﬁelds. They are in one to one correspondence with the
KK (i.e. torus momentum modes) and winding states of the fundamental string
which couple to the same 12 gauge ﬁelds. This allows us, in principle, to identify
the fundamental string states as soliton states and, as explained in earlier sections,
U-duality of string theory forces us to do so.
Before turning to solitons of the additional sector of each string theory, we
shall ﬁrst explain here why these ﬁeld theory solitons are exact solutions of type
II string theory. Type II string theory in a (g, b, Φ) background is described by a
non-linear sigma-model with (1,1) world-sheet supersymmetry. The KK monopole
background is described by a (4,4) supersymmetric sigma-model plus a free (1,1)
supersymmetric ﬁeld theory; this is conformally invariant [56] and so gives an
exact classical solution of string theory. The pp-wave background is also an exact
classical solution [57], so that the T-duals of these two solutions must be exact
classical solutions too. In contrast, the heterotic string in a (g, b, Φ) background
23

is described by a (1,0) supersymmetric sigma-model, and at least some of the
solutions described above only satisfy the ﬁeld equations to lowest order in α′ . In
some cases, as we will describe later, these solutions can be modiﬁed to obtain exact
classical heterotic string solutions. However, it is not known in general whether
such backgrounds can be modiﬁed by higher order corrections to give an exact
string solution.
We have now accounted for 12 + 12 of the required 28 + 28 types of charge of all
three ten-dimensional superstring theories. We now consider how the additional
16 + 16 charges arise in each of these three theories, starting with the type II
string. It is known that, after toroidal compactiﬁcation, the type IIA and type IIB
string theories are equivalent [58] but it is instructive to consider both of them. In
either case, we showed in the last section that U-duality requires that the missing
16 + 16 types of charge transform as the irreducible spinor representation of the Tduality group. Since T-duality is a perturbative symmetry, if there were electrically
charged states of this type in the fundamental string spectrum, there would also
have to be magnetic ones. However, magnetic charges only occur in the soliton
sector, so a prediction of U-duality is that the corresponding 16 electric charges
are also to be found in the soliton sector and not, as one might have thought, in
the elementary string spectrum. We shall conﬁrm this.
First we consider the type IIA theory. The ten-dimensional bosonic massless
ﬁelds are the (g, b, Φ) ﬁelds of the common sector plus a one-form gauge potential, AM , and a three-form gauge potential, AM N P . These extra ﬁelds appear in
the RR sector but couple to the string through their ﬁeld strengths only. Upon
compactiﬁcation to four dimensions, AM gives one abelian gauge ﬁeld Aµ and
AM N P gives 15 abelian gauge ﬁelds Aij
µ . These also couple to the string through
their ﬁeld strengths only and so there are no elementary string excitations that
are electrically-charged with respect to these 16 gauge ﬁelds, as expected. The
solitonic p-brane solutions of the ten-dimensional ﬁeld theory involving AM or
AM N P and breaking only half the supersymmetry consist of a 0-brane, i.e. a (tendimensional) extreme black hole, a 2-brane (i.e. a membrane), a 4-brane and a
24

6-brane. The 0-brane and the 2-brane are of electric type. The 0-brane gives rise
to an electrically-charged four-dimensional black hole in the toroidally-compactiﬁed
theory by the procedure of taking periodic arrays of the ten-dimensional solution.
The membrane gives a total of 6×5
2 = 15 electric black holes in four dimensions
after ‘wrapping’ it around two directions of the six-torus and then taking periodic arrays to construct a four-dimensional solution. Similarly, the magnetic type
4-brane and 6-brane can be wrapped around the six-torus (introducing periodic
arrays where necessary) to give 15+1 magnetically-charged black holes in four dimensions. We have therefore found a total of 32 additional electric and magnetic
charges. Combined with the previous 24 charges this gives a total of 56 elementary
charged states carrying only one type of charge. From the low-energy ﬁeld theory
we know that these charges transform according to the 56 representation of E7 ,
and that acting on these elementary solitons with E7 (Z) generates a 56-dimensional
charge lattice. As anticipated, the extra 16+16 electric and magnetic charges are
inert under S-duality but are mixed by the T-duality group O(6, 6; Z). In addition
to the p-brane winding modes discussed above, there are also p-brane momentum
modes; however, to give a 0-brane in 4 dimensions, the p-brane must wrap around
the torus as well as having internal momentum, so that the resulting soliton would
carry more than one type of charge and so would not be elementary; nevertheless,
these solitons occur in the charge lattices generated by the elementary solitons.
A similar analysis can be made for the type IIB theory. In this case the extra
massless bosonic ﬁelds in the ten dimensional eﬀective ﬁeld theory are a scalar, a
(+)

two-form potential, AM N , and a four-form potential AM N P Q with self-dual ﬁveform ﬁeld strength. As for the type IIA string theory, these gauge ﬁelds couple
through their ﬁeld strengths only and so, again, there are no string excitations
carrying the new electric charges. In the solitonic sector of the ten-dimensional
ﬁeld theory there is a neutral 5-brane, a self-dual 3-brane and a string, in addition
to the string and neutral ﬁvebrane of the (g, b, Φ) sector. The new neutral ﬁvebrane
gives 6 magnetic charges in four dimensions, the self-dual 3-brane gives 10 electric
and 10 magnetic charges and the new string gives six electric charges. Note that
25

the new solitonic string couples to the 16 U(1) gauge ﬁelds coming from AM N
(+)

and AM N P Q . These 16+16 charges couple to AM N , while the fundamental string
and the solitonic string of the common sector both couple to bM N ; thus it may
be consistent to identify the fundamental and common sector solitonic strings, but
the new solitonic string cannot be identiﬁed with either. As for the type IIA string
all 56 charges generate the irreducible 56-dimensional representation of E7 (Z).
Finally, we turn to the heterotic string. We have seen that the common sector
solutions of the low-energy eﬀective supergravity theory include 12 KK and abelian
H monopoles, and their 12 electric duals, and under T-duality these must have
16+16 electric and magnetic black hole partners coupling to the 16 remaining
U(1) gauge ﬁelds. These have a ten-dimensional interpretation as the 0-branes
and 8-branes of N = 1 ten-dimensional supergravity coupled to 16 abelian vector
multiplets [21] (which can be taken to be those of the U(1)16 subgroup of E8 × E8
or SO(32)/Z2 ).

In addition to these black hole solutions, there are also BPS monopole solutions of the heterotic string arising from wrapping heterotic or gauge ﬁve-branes
around the six-torus [16]. The BPS monopoles are not solutions of the eﬀective
supergravity theory with abelian gauge group, but it has been argued (e.g. in [47])
that there should be modiﬁcations of these monopoles that are solutions of the
abelian theory. The moduli spaces for multi-soliton solutions of BPS monopoles
√
are hyper-Kahler [59] while those for extreme a = 3 black holes are ﬂat [40,41],
so that the black holes and BPS monopoles should not be related by duality. If the
modiﬁed BPS monopoles also have a non-ﬂat moduli space, then they too cannot
be dual to black holes. However, it is also possible that they have a ﬂat moduli
space, and even that they are equivalent to black hole solutions. The modiﬁed BPS
monopoles, if they exist, would have electric partners under S-duality which would
be electric solitons. The magnetic partners under S-duality of electrically charged
Bogomolnyi fundamental string states are expected to be magnetic monopole solitons, which might be either BPS-type solutions, or black holes (or both, if they are
equivalent). In either case, the fundamental string states should be identiﬁed with
26

the electrically charged solitons related to the magnetic monopoles by S-duality.
Whereas the solutions of the type II string we have discussed are exact conformal ﬁeld theories, the solutions of the heterotic string are only approximate
low-energy solutions. However, some of these heterotic solutions have a compact
holonomy group, and for these one can set the Yang-Mills connection equal to the
spin-connection so that the sigma-model becomes one with (1,1) supersymmetry
and the resulting background is an exact solution of string theory. Applying this
to the ﬁve-brane gives the symmetric ﬁve-brane solution [50] and this can also be
used to construct a ‘symmetric KK monopole’. However, we do not know which
of the other solutions of the low-energy eﬀective theory can be corrected to give
exact solutions, and the duality symmetry of non-abelian phases of the theory are
not understood. Moreover the α′ corrections to the four-dimensional supergravity
action give a theory that is not S-duality invariant, but if string-loop corrections
are also included, an S-duality invariant action should arise.

5. Toroidal compactification to other dimensions
In this section, we extend the previous discussion to consider the duality symmetries of type II and heterotic strings toroidally compactiﬁed to d dimensions.
The resulting low-energy ﬁeld theory is a d-dimensional supergravity theory which
has a rigid ‘duality’ group G, which is a symmetry of the equations of motion, and
in odd dimensions is in fact a symmetry of the action. In each case the massless
scalar ﬁelds of the theory take values in G/H, where H is the maximal compact
subgroup of G. G has an O(10 − d, 10 − d) subgroup for the type II string, and
an O(10 − d, 26 − d) subgroup for the heterotic string. In either string theory,

it is known that this subgroup is broken down to the discrete T-duality group,
O(10 − d, 10 − d; Z) or O(10 − d, 26 − d; Z). It is natural to conjecture that the

whole supergravity duality group G is broken down to a discrete subgroup G(Z)
(deﬁned below) in the d-dimensional string theory. We have already seen that this

occurs for d = 4 and will argue that for d > 4 the symmetry G is broken to a dis27

crete subgroup by a generalisation of the Dirac quantization condition. In tables
1 and 2, we list these groups for toroidally compactiﬁed superstring theories (at a
generic point in the moduli space so that the gauge group is abelian).
Space-time
Dimension d
10A
10B
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

Supergravity Duality Group G

String T-duality

Conjectured
Full String Duality

SO(1, 1)/Z2
SL(2, R)
SL(2, R) × O(1, 1)
SL(3, R) × SL(2, R)
O(5, 5)
SL(5, R)
E6(6)
E7(7)
E8(8)
E9(9)
E10(10)

Z2
O(2, 2; Z)
O(3, 3; Z)
O(4, 4; Z)
O(5, 5; Z)
O(6, 6; Z)
O(7, 7; Z)
O(8, 8; Z)
O(9, 9; Z)

SL(2, Z)
SL(2, Z) × Z2
SL(3, Z) × SL(2, Z)
O(5, 5; Z)
SL(5, Z)
E6(6) (Z)
E7(7) (Z)
E8(8) (Z)
E9(9) (Z)
E10(10) (Z)

Table 1 Duality symmetries for type II string compactiﬁed to d dimensions.

For the type II string, the supergravity duality groups G are given in [60,
⋆

61] . The Lie algebra of E9(9) is the E8(8) Kac-Moody algebra, while the algebra
corresponding to the E10 Dynkin diagram has been discussed in [61, 63]. The
d = 2 duality symmetry contains the inﬁnite-dimensional Geroch symmetry group
of toroidally compactiﬁed general relativity. In d = 9, the conjectured duality
group is a product of an SL(2, Z) S-duality and a Z2 T-duality, while for d < 8
we conjecture a uniﬁed U-duality. For d = 8, the T-duality group O(2, 2; Z) ∼

[SL(2, Z) × SL(2, Z)]/Z2 × Z2 is a subgroup of the conjectured duality. In d = 10,

the type IIA string has G = SO(1, 1)/Z2 , while the type IIB has G = SL(2, R), as
indicated in the ﬁrst two lines of the table. We shall abbreviate En(n) (Z) to En (Z)
when no confusion can arise.

⋆ They have also been discussed in the context of worldvolume actions of extended objects in
supergravity backgrounds [62].
28

Space-time
Dimension d
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2

Supergravity
Duality Group G
O(16) × SO(1, 1)
O(1, 17) × SO(1, 1)
O(2, 18) × SO(1, 1)
O(3, 19) × SO(1, 1)
O(4, 20) × SO(1, 1)
O(5, 21) × SO(1, 1)
O(6, 22) × SL(2, R)
O(8, 24)
O(8, 24)(1)

String T-duality
O(16; Z)
O(1, 17; Z)
O(2, 18; Z)
O(3, 19; Z)
O(4, 20; Z)
O(5, 21; Z)
O(6, 22; Z)
O(7, 23; Z)
O(8, 24; Z)

Conjectured
Full String Duality
O(16; Z) × Z2
O(1, 17; Z) × Z2
O(2, 18; Z) × Z2
O(3, 19; Z) × Z2
O(4, 20; Z) × Z2
O(5, 21; Z) × Z2
O(6, 22; Z) × SL(2, Z)
O(8, 24; Z)
O(8, 24)(1) (Z)

Table 2 Duality symmetries for heterotic string compactiﬁed to d dimensions.
For the heterotic string, the supergravity duality groups G for d > 2 can be
found in articles collected in [64]. Pure N = 4 supergravity in d = 4 reduces to
a theory with G = SO(8, 2) in d = 3 and to a theory with supergravity duality
group given by the aﬃne group SO(8, 2)(1) in d = 2 [60]. Similar arguments
suggest that the heterotic string should give a d = 2 supergravity theory with G
given by the aﬃne group O(8, 24)(1) symmetry. The heterotic string is conjectured
to have an S × T duality symmetry in d ≥ 4 and a uniﬁed U-duality in d ≤ 3.

Sen conjectured an O(8, 24; Z) symmetry of d = 3 heterotic strings in [65]. The

d = 10 supergravity theory has an O(16) symmetry acting on the 16 abelian gauge
ﬁelds which is broken to the ﬁnite group O(16; Z); we refer to this as the T-duality
symmetry of the ten-dimensional theory.
The supergravity symmetry group G in d dimensions doesn’t act on the ddimensional space-time and so survives dimensional reduction. Then G is necessarily a subgroup of the symmetry G′ in d′ < d dimensions and dimensional
reduction gives an embedding of G in G′ , and G(Z) is a subgroup of G′ (Z). We
use this embedding of G into the duality group in d′ = 4 dimensions to deﬁne the
duality group G(Z) in d > 4 dimensions as G ∩ E7 (Z) for the type II string and as

G ∩ [O(6, 22; Z) × SL(2, Z)] for the heterotic string.

The symmetries in d < 4 dimensions can be understood using a type of argu29

ment ﬁrst developed to describe the Geroch symmetry group of general relativity
and used in [65] for d = 3 heterotic strings. The three-dimensional type II string
can be regarded as a four-dimensional theory compactiﬁed on a circle and so is
expected to have an E7 (Z) symmetry. There would then be seven diﬀerent E7 (Z)
symmetry groups of the three dimensional theory corresponding to each of the
seven diﬀerent ways of ﬁrst compactifying from ten to four dimensions, and then
from four to three. The seven E7 (Z) groups and the O(7, 7; Z) T-duality group
do not commute with each other and generate a discrete subgroup of E8 which
we deﬁne to be E8 (Z). (Note that the corresponding Lie algebras, consisting of
seven E7(7) algebras and an O(7, 7), generate the whole of the E8(8) Lie algebra.)
Similarly, in d = 2 dimensions, there are eight E8 (Z) symmetry groups and an
O(8, 8; Z) T-duality group which generate E9 (Z) as a discrete subgroup of E9(9) ,
and in the heterotic string there are eight O(8, 24; Z) symmetry groups from three
dimensions and an O(8, 24; Z) T-duality group which generate O(8, 24; Z)(1) as a
discrete subgroup of O(8, 24)(1).
We now turn to the charge quantization condition and soliton spectrum in
d > 4 dimensions. Consider ﬁrst the example of type II string theory compactiﬁed
to d = 5 dimensions. The low-energy theory is d = 5, N = 8 supergravity [66]
which has 27 abelian vector gauge ﬁelds AIµ and an E6(6) rigid symmetry of the
action. Recall that in ﬁve dimensions electric charge can be carried by particles
or 0-brane solitons, while magnetic charge can be carried by strings or 1-brane
solitons. The 27 types of electric charge qI transform as a 27 of E6(6) while 27 types
of magnetic charge pI transform as a 27. These charges satisfy the quantization
condition qI pI = integer [53,67] which is invariant under E6(6) . As we shall see, all
54 types of charge occur and so the electric charges take values in a 27-dimensional
lattice Λ and the magnetic ones take values in the dual lattice. This breaks the
E6(6) symmetry down to the discrete subgroup which preserves the lattice. If the
theory is now compactiﬁed to four dimensions, E6(6) survives as a subgroup of
the E7 (7) duality symmetry in d = 4 and the 27-dimensional lattice Λ survives as
a sub-lattice of the 28-dimensional lattice of d = 4 electric charges (this will be
30

checked for the elementary charged solitons below). Thus the subgroup of E6(6)
preserving Λ is E6(6) ∩ E7 (Z), which is precisely the discrete group E6 (Z) deﬁned

above.

The ﬁve-dimensional theory has a Bogomolnyi bound involving the electric
and magnetic charges [11,17] which is saturated by Bogomolnyi solutions that do
not break all the supersymmetries, and the masses and charges of these states are
expected to be unrenormalised in the quantum theory. This bound is invariant
under E6(6) and E6 (Z) and so Bogomolnyi solitons automatically ﬁt into E6 (Z)
representations.
The d = 5 elementary solitons of the type IIA theory carrying precisely one
type of electric or magnetic charge and breaking half the supersymmetry can be
identiﬁed in a similar manner to that used in d = 4. The 27 elementary electrically
charged solitons, which are all extreme black hole solutions in d = 5, and the 27
magnetic ones, which are all extreme black strings, arise from d = 10 solutions
as follows. The 5-brane wrapped around the 5-torus gives one electrically charged
0-brane and 5 magentically charged strings. The d = 10 solitonic string gives
5 electric black holes and 1 black string. The 0-brane gives one black hole, the
4-brane gives 10 black holes and 5 black strings, the 4-brane gives 5 black holes
and 10 black strings and the 6-brane gives 1 black string. In addition, there are
5 electric black holes arising from pp-waves travelling in each of the 5 toroidal
dimensions (these can also be viewed as momentum modes of the solitonic string),
and their 5 magnetic duals, which are a magnetic string generalisation of the KK
magnetic monopole. These are the solutions consisting of the product of a 4-torus
with self-dual Taub-NUT and two-dimensional Minkowski space. The non-compact
six-dimensional subspace gives rise to a 5-dimensional magnetic string in the same
way that a 4-dimensional KK magnetic monopole originates from a ﬁve-dimensional
solution. Note that these solutions can be thought of as wrapped 4-brane solutions.
This gives the 27+27 elementary charges, as required.
On further compactiﬁcation to d = 4, the 27 electric charges give 27 electri31

cally charged black holes in d = 4 and the magnetic strings give 27 magnetic black
holes (together with 27 d = 4 black strings). There are two additional elementary charged states in d = 4, the pp-wave travelling in the ﬁfth dimension and
the KK monopole corresponding to the ﬁfth dimension; these two solutions are
uncharged from the ﬁve-dimensional point of view. This corresponds to the fact
that the four-dimensional charges lie in a 56 of E7(7) and this decomposes into
E6(6) representations as 56 → 27 + 27 + 1 + 1.
Similar arguments apply to other strings in d ≥ 4 dimensions, where charge

quantization eﬀects break G to at most the string duality groups listed in the
tables. In d dimensions there are electric point charges and magnetic (d − 4)-brane
solitons (which correspond to a subset of the four-dimensional black hole solitons

on compactiﬁcation) and the Dirac quantization of their charges [53,67] breaks
the duality symmetry to the discrete subgroup G(Z). There is a similar charge
quantization condition on electric p-branes and magnetic d − p − 4 branes in d
dimensions [53,67] which again break G to G(Z). In each case, the Bogomolnyi

solitons automatically ﬁt into representations of the duality group (providing one
can continue solutions from one vacuum to another as discussed in section 3).
For d < 4, it is not clear how to understand the breaking of G to G(Z) directly
in terms of d-dimensional quantum eﬀects. Thus, while we have shown that for
d ≥ 4 the group G is broken to at most G(Z), there is less evidence for our

conjectures for d < 4, although we do know that a subgroup of G is broken to the

discrete T-duality group, and that the solitons will ﬁt into representations of G(Z).

32

6. Compactification of Type II strings on K3 × T 2
The analysis of Bogomolnyi states can also be carried out for non-toroidal
compactiﬁcations. An interesting example is compactiﬁcation of the type II superstring on K3 × T 2 because while K3 has no non-trivial one-cycles and hence

no string winding modes it does have 22 non-trivial two-cycles around which a p-

brane for p > 1 can wrap itself to produce a (p − 2)-brane which will then produce

monopole winding states on T 2 if p < 5 (taking periodic arrays where necessary).

The eﬀective four-dimensional supergravity can be found by the two stage process
of compactiﬁcation to six dimensions on K3 [25], followed by a straightforward
reduction on T 2 . It is an N = 4 supergravity with an SL(2; R) × O(6, 22) symme-

try and 28 U(1) gauge ﬁelds, exactly as for the compactiﬁcation of the heterotic
string on T 6 at a generic point in the moduli space. In fact, the four-dimensional

supergravity theories are identical because the coupling of N = 4 supergravity to k
⋆

abelian vector multiplets is uniqely determined by the choice of gauge group [46] .
The analysis of section 2 again applies, with the result that the duality group
is broken down to SL(2; Z) × O(6, 22; Z) by the charge quantization condition,
and the Bogomolnyi bound is again duality invariant. The soliton spectrum then

automatically ﬁts into representations of SL(2; Z) × O(6, 22; Z) and the solitons
correspond to precisely to the same extreme black holes as were discussed in section
4 for the heterotic string. However, the ten-dimensional origin of the elementary
charged solutions is now diﬀerent and we now discuss these.
Consider ﬁrst the common (g, b, Φ) sector. Because K3 has no isometries and
no non-trivial one-cycles all KK modes and string winding modes arise from the T 2
compactiﬁcation. This yields modes carrying 2+2 types of electric charge which
couple to the 2+2 gauge ﬁelds from the metric and antisymmetric tensor. The
corresponding magnetic charges are the KK monopoles and the H-monopoles. The
⋆ Compactification of the heterotic string on K3 × T 2 leads to a four-dimensional effective
field theory with only N = 2 supersymmetry, for which the masses of the Bogomolnyi states
might be expected to receive quantum corrections, so we shall not discuss this case here.
33

latter can be interpreted as the winding modes on T 2 of the six-dimensional solitonic string found from ‘wrapping’ the neutral ten-dimensional ﬁvebrane around
the K3 surface [68]. We have therefore identiﬁed the modes carrying just one type
of the 4+4 electric and magnetic charges in this sector. As before, we do not consider modes arising from the ten-dimensional solitonic string on the grounds that
these are not independent of the fundamental string modes already considered.
Consider now the type IIA string. The additional 24 vector gauge ﬁelds in the
four dimensional eﬀective ﬁeld theory arise from the ten-dimensional RR gauge
ﬁelds AM and AM N P . One of these vector gauge ﬁelds, Aµ , is the four-dimensional
component of AM . The remaining 23 come from expressing the ten-dimensional
three-form AM N P as the exterior product of a four-dimensional one-form gauge
potential times each of the 22+1 harmonic two-forms of K3 × T 2 . We must now

ﬁnd the charged Bogomolnyi states to which these ﬁelds couple. Again we consider

states carrying only one type of charge. The ten-dimensional 0-brane and six-brane
solitons associated with AM yield, respectively, one electric and one magnetic fourdimensional black hole coupling to Aµ . The electric 2-brane and the magnetic 4brane solitons in ten dimensions produce the Bogomolnyi states carrying the other
23+23 types of charge coupling to the other 23 gauge ﬁelds. Speciﬁcally, the 2brane can be wrapped around the 22+1 non-trivial two-cycles of K3 ×T 2 to produce

22+1 six-dimensional black holes of which one can then take periodic arrays to
get 22+1 four-dimensional electric black holes. The four brane can be wrapped
around the 22 homology two-cycles of K3 to give 22 six-dimensional 2-branes, each
of which can then be wrapped around T 2 to produce a four-dimensional magnetic
black hole. Alternatively, the four-brane can be wrapped entirely around K3 to give
one six-dimensional black hole which then produces a further magnetic black hole
in four dimensions on taking periodic arrays. We have now found a total of 24+24
additional electric and magnetic black holes. They each satisfy the Bogomolnyi
bound, because the ten-dimensional p-brane solitons do, and they each carry just
one type charge. Combining these with the 4+4 black holes from the (g, b, Φ) sector
yields a total of 28+28 elementary electric and magnetic extreme black holes which
34

generate the (2, 28) representation of SL(2; Z) × O(6, 22; Z).
Consider instead the type IIB superstring. The RR gauge ﬁelds are AM N and
(+)

AM N P Q which produce 2+22 four dimensional gauge ﬁelds upon compactiﬁcation
on K3 × T 2 [25]. These ﬁelds couple to the soliton states in four dimensions

obtained by wrapping the extra solitonic string and ﬁvebrane, and the self-dual
three-brane, around the homology cycles of K3 × T 2 , taking periodic arrays when

necessary to get a four-dimensional soliton (alias extreme black hole). There are
two homology one-cycles and two homology ﬁve-cycles so the extra solitonic string
and ﬁvebrane produce 2+2 four-dimensional electric and magnetic black holes.
There are 44 three-cycles so the threebrane produces 44 four-dimensional solitons.
Since the threebrane is self-dual 22 of these are electric and 22 magnetic. Again
we have a total of 24+24 additional charges. Combining these with the 4+4 black
holes from the (g, b, Φ) sector again yields a total of 28+28 elementary electric
and magnetic extreme black holes which generate the (2, 28) representation of

SL(2; Z) × O(6, 22; Z).
Since the type II string compactiﬁed on K3 × T 2 and the generic toroidal

compactiﬁcation of the heterotic string have exactly the same four-dimensional
low-energy ﬁeld theory it is natural to conjecture that they might be equivalent

string theories. If this is so then the Bogomolnyi states of the heterotic string
discussed at the conclusion of the previous section would have a straightforward
ten-dimensional interpretation after all. It would have some other remarkable
consequences. For example, at special points of the heterotic string moduli space,
there are extra massless ﬁelds and an enhanced (Yang-Mills) symmetry due to nonperturbative world-sheet eﬀects (i.e. non-perturbative in α′ , but perturbative in
g). If the compactiﬁed type II string is equivalent, it must have the same enhanced
symmetry in vacua corresponding to the same points in the scalar ﬁeld coset space.
This presumably does not arise from non-perturbative world-sheet eﬀects, so would
have to come from non-perturbative stringy eﬀects, or from Wilson lines and their
p-brane generalisations. This would mean that the sigma-model coupling constant
α′ of the heterotic string becomes one of the stringy coupling constants of the
35

type II theory, as might have been expected from the fact that for the toridally
compactiﬁed type II string, all coupling constants are on an equal footing and are
mixed up under U-duality.

7. U-duality and the 11-dimensional supermembrane
As we have seen, the E7 (Z) invariance of the spectrum of soliton states of
N = 8 supergravity is an automatic consequence of the E7 (Z) invariance of the
equations of motion. The non-trivial features are, ﬁrstly, that these states have an
interpretation in terms of ten-dimensional KK solitons and solitonic p-branes and,
secondly, that if the ten-dimensional ﬁeld theory is considered to be the eﬀective
ﬁeld theory of the type II string theory then E7 (Z) invariance requires an identiﬁcation of the solitonic string with the fundamental string. N = 8 supergravity
can also be obtained by dimensional reduction of 11-dimensional supergravity on
T 7 . We shall now show that the elementary soliton states of N = 8 supergravity also have an interpretation in terms of KK solitons and solitonic p-branes of
11-dimensional supergravity. There are 7 KK magnetic monopoles and 7 electric
duals, which are pp-waves of 11-dimensional supergravity [69] travelling in the
internal dimensions. The 11-dimensional solitonic p-branes are the electric membrane and the magnetic ﬁvebrane. Each can be wrapped around the seven-torus
to produce 21 four-dimensional solitons. Thus we have a total of 28 electric and
28 magnetic four-dimensional solitons each carrying one of the 56 types of charge
which are a basis for the irreducible 56 repesentation of E7 (Z). If we now wish to
interpret 11-dimensional supergravity as an eﬀective ﬁeld theory of a fundamental
E7 (Z) supermembrane theory then we must identify the fundamental membrane
with the solitonic one, just as we were forced to identify the fundamental string
with the (appropriate) solitonic string.
Consider now the compactiﬁcation to M4 on K3 × T 3 of eleven-dimensional

supergravity [28]. The eﬀective ﬁeld theory is the same as that of the type II
superstring compactiﬁed on K3 × T 2 , i.e. an N = 4 supergravity with 28 U(1)
36

gauge ﬁelds and an SL(2; Z) × O(6, 22; Z) symmetry. The soliton spectrum is

also the same. In the monopole sector we have, ﬁrstly, 3 KK monopoles from
the T 3 factor and, secondly, a further 25 monopoles from wrapping the solitonic
ﬁvebrane around the 3+22 homology ﬁve-cycles of K3 × T 2 . This gives a total of
28 monopoles. The 28 electrically charged solitons are the electric duals of these

monopoles which can be understood in terms of the KK and winding modes of
either the solitonic membrane or a fundamental membrane. The entire set of 56
states can be assigned to the (2,28) representation of SL(2; R) × O(6, 22), inducing

a corresponding representation of SL(2; Z) × O(6, 22; Z).

These results are encouraging signs that it may be possible to deﬁne the quantum supermembrane theory entirely in terms of the solitonic membrane solution
of eleven-dimensional supergravity. Alternatively, one can envisage a dual formulation in terms of a fundamental 11-dimensional the superﬁvebrane, in which
case the solitonic ﬁvebrane might be identiﬁed with a fundamental ﬁvebrane. Of
possible relevance in this connection is the fact that the membrane and ﬁvebrane
solitons have a very diﬀerent global structure. Both have a degenerate Killing
horizon but whereas the membrane horizon conceals a singularity in an interior region [70], much like the extreme Reissner Nordstrom solution of four-dimensional
Maxwell-Einstein theory, the ﬁvebrane is completely non-singular [38].

8. Comments
The equations of motion of four-dimensional eﬀective supergravity theories of
compactiﬁed superstring theories are invariant under a continuous duality group G
that is broken by quantum eﬀects to a discrete subgroup G(Z). For the toroidallycompactiﬁed heterotic string at a generic point in the moduli space, and for the
K3 × T 2 -compactiﬁed type II superstrings, this group is the S × T duality group

SL(2; Z) × O(6, 22; Z). For the toroidally-compactiﬁed type II superstrings it is

the U duality group E7 (Z) which contains the S × T duality group SL(2; Z) ×

O(6, 22; Z). Whereas T-duality is known to be an exact symmetry of string theory
37

at each order in the string coupling constant g, the conjectured S- and T- dualities
are non-perturbative. We have provided evidence for U-duality of the type II string
by considering those features of string theory that are expected to be given exactly
by a semi-classical analysis although it should be emphasized that this evidence
depends only on the form of the eﬀective supergravity theory and would apply
equally to any consistent quantum theory of gravity for which this is the eﬀective
low-energy action. Nevertheless, by supposing this consistent quantum theory to
be string theory our arguments have led us to the remarkable conclusions that it is
necessary to identify certain states of the string with extreme black holes, and the
fundamental string with a solitonic string. We have also seen that the elementary
Bogomolnyi states are extreme black hole solutions of the low-energy theory, and
have shown how these arise from p-brane solitons of the ten-dimensional theory.
The zero modes of the scalar ﬁelds of the low energy ﬁeld theory are all coupling
constants of the string theory, so that G(Z) symmetry relates diﬀerent regimes
in the perturbation theory in these coupling constants, interchanging strong and
weak coupling and, in the case of U-duality, interchanging g with α′ , in the sense
of mixing the quantum loop expansion in g with the sigma-model perturbation
expansion in α′ and the moduli of the compactiﬁcation space. For the compactiﬁed
type II superstring, any physical quantity (e.g. the S-matrix) can be expanded in
terms of the 70 coupling constants associated with zero modes of the 70 scalars.
In the world-sheet approach to string theory, one ﬁrst integrates over the sigmamodel degrees of freedom on a Riemann surface of ﬁxed genus, obtaining a result
parameterised by the sigma-model coupling constants, and then sums over genus.
As U-duality mixes up all 70 coupling constants, the ﬁnal result may be expected
to depend on all 70 scalars in a symmetric way, even though the calculation was
very asymmetrical and in particular picked out the dilaton to play a special role.
This would hugely constrain the theory and the assumption of U-duality, together
with N = 8 supersymmety, gives us a great deal of non-perturbative information,
and might even enable us to solve the theory! This structure also suggests that
there might be a new formulation of string theory which treats all the coupling
38

constants on an equal footing.
We have seen that there are duality symmetries in all dimensions d ≤ 10 and it

is interesting to ask whether the d < 10 symmetries can correspond to symmetries

of the 10-dimensional theory. If e.g. the four-dimensional dualities correspond to
symmetries of the full ten-dimensional theory, these symmetries must interchange
the various p-brane solitons of the string-theory; such symmetries would probably
have to be non-local. If the theories in d < 4 dimensions really do have the duality
symmetries suggested in section 5, and if these have analogues in higher dimensions, this would have remarkable consequences for string theory. For example, the
U-duality of the three-dimensional heterotic string includes transformations that
would mix the string with 5-brane solitons in ten dimensions, and so would contain
the transformations described as the ‘duality of dualities’ in [3]. For the type II
string theory, this suggests that E10 (Z) might be a discrete non-local symmetry of
the ten-dimensional string theory!
One of the predictions of S-duality for the heterotic string is the presence of
certain dyon bound states in the Bogomolnyi spectrum, which can be translated
into to a prediction concerning harmonic forms on the multi-monopole moduli space
[71]. It would be interesting to consider the corresponding predictions for the type
II string. Recently, some strong-coupling evidence for S-duality of the heterotic
string has been found by studying partition functions of certain topological ﬁeld
theories [72], and again it would be interesting to seek similar strong-coupling tests
for U-duality.
Finally, since N = 8 supergravity and its soliton spectrum are U-duality invariant, many of the properties previously thought to be unique to string theory
are in fact already properties of the eﬀective supergravity theory once account
is taken of all soliton solutions. Since only stable states can appear in an exact
S-matrix it is possible that the only states of the exact toroidally compactiﬁed
type II string theory are the Bogomolnyi states and that these are in one to one
correspondence with soliton states of the supergravity theory. This would support
39

a previous suggestion [73] that a fundamental superstring theory might actually
be equivalent to its eﬀective ﬁeld theory once solitons of the latter are taken into
account. To pursue this further one would need to ﬁnd higher spin (> 2) soliton
states corresponding to the higher spin states of string theory. There seems to
be no problem in principle with the existence of such higher-spin soliton states in
N = 8 supergravity because the a = 0 and a = 1extreme black holes must belong
to massive supermultiplets with spins > 2 as they break more than half the supersymmetry. In this connection it is worth recalling the similarity of the mass/spin
relation for Regge trajectories in four-dimensional string theory, M 2 ∝ αJ′ , with

J
.
that of the degenerate Kerr solutions of general relativity, M 2 ∝ G

Acknowledgements: We are grateful to Louise Dolan, Michael Duﬀ, José
Figueroa-O’Farrill, Jerome Gauntlett, Gary Gibbons, Michael Green, Bernard Julia, Waﬁc Sabra, Trevor Samols, Kellogg Stelle and Edward Witten for helpful
comments.

REFERENCES
1. A. Giveon, M. Porrati and E. Rabinovici, Phys. Rep. 244 (1994) 77.
2. A. Font, L. Ibanez, D. Lust and F. Quevedo, Phys. Lett. B249 (1990) 35;
S.J. Rey, Phys. Rev. D43 (1991) 526.
3. J.H. Schwarz and A. Sen, Nucl. Phys. B411 (1994) 35; Phys. Lett. 312B
(1993) 105.
4. A. Sen, Nucl. Phys. B404 (1993) 109; Phys. Lett. 303B (1993); Int. J. Mod.
Phys. A8 (1993) 5079; Mod. Phys. Lett. A8 (1993) 2023.
5. K.S. Narain, Phys. Lett. B169 (1986) 41.
6. K.S. Narain, M.H. Sarmadi and E.Witten, Nucl. Phys. B279 (1987) 369.
7. E. Cremmer and B. Julia, Phys. Lett. 80B (1978) 48; Nucl. Phys. B159
(1979) 141.
40

8. G.W. Gibbons and C.M. Hull, Phys. Lett. 109B (1982) 190.
9. G.W. Gibbons, in Supersymmetry, Supergravity and Related Topics, eds. F.
del Aguila, J. A. de Azcárraga and L.E. Ibañez, (World Scientiﬁc 1985).
10. R. Kallosh and T. Ortin, Phys.Rev. D48 (1993) 742.
11. G.W. Gibbons and M.J. Perry, Nucl. Phys. B248 (1984) 629.
12. S. W. Hawking, Monthly Notices Roy. Astron. Soc. 152 (1971) 75; Abdus
Salam in Quantum Gravity: an Oxford Symposium (Eds. Isham, Penrose
and Sciama, O.U.P. 1975); G. t’Hooft, Nucl. Phys. B335 (1990) 138.
13. M. J. Duﬀ, R. R. Khuri, R. Minasian and J. Rahmfeld, Nucl. Phys. B418
(1994) 195.
14. L. Susskind, preprint hep-th/9309145; J.G. Russo and L. Susskind, preprint
hep-th/9405117.
15. M.J. Duﬀ and J. Rahmfeld, preprint hep-th/9406105.
16. J. Harvey, J. Liu, Phys. Lett. B268 (1991) 40.
17. G.W. Gibbons, D. Kastor, L. London, P.K. Townsend and J. Traschen, Nucl.
Phys. B416 (1994) 850.
18. A. Dabholkar, G.W. Gibbons, J.A. Harvey and F. Ruiz-Ruiz, Nucl. Phys.
B340 (1990) 33; M.J. Duﬀ, G.W. Gibbons and P.K. Townsend, Phys. Lett.
332B (1994) 321.
19. C. Callan, J. Harvey and A. Strominger, Nucl. Phys. B359 (1991) 611.
20. M.J. Duﬀ and J.X. Lu, Nucl. Phys. B354 (1991) 141; Phys. Lett. 273B
(1991) 409.
21. G.T. Horowitz and A. Strominger, Nucl. Phys. B360 (1991) 197.
22. M.J. Duﬀ and J.X. Lu, Nucl. Phys. B416 (1993) 301.
23. J. A. de Azcárraga, J.P. Gauntlett, J.M. Izquierdo and P.K. Townsend, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 63 (1989) 2443.
41

24. E. Witten, Phys. Lett. 153B (1985) 243.
25. P.K. Townsend, Phys. Lett. 139B (1984) 283; M.B. Green, J.H. Schwarz
and P.C. West, Nucl. Phys. B254 (1985) 327.
26. E. Bergshoeﬀ, E. Sezgin and P.K. Townsend, Phys. Lett. 189B (1987) 75;
Ann. Phys. (N.Y.) 185 (1988) 330.
27. E. Cremmer, B. Julia and J. Scherk, Phys. Lett. 76B (1978) 409.
28. M.J. Duﬀ, B.E.W. Nilsson and C.N. Pope, Phys. Lett 129B (1983) 39.
29. M.J. Duﬀ and K.S. Stelle, Phys. Lett. 253B (1991) 113.
30. R. Güven, Phys. Lett. 276B (1992) 49.
31. M.K. Gaillard and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B193 (1981) 221.
32. M. Günaydin, G. Sierra and P.K. Townsend, Phys. Lett. 133B (1983) 72;
Nucl. Phys. B242 (1984) 244.
33. E. Witten, Phys. Lett. 86B (1979) 283.
34. E. Witten and D. Olive, Phys. Lett. B78 (1978) 97.
35. C.M. Hull, Ph.D. Thesis, Cambridge 1983.
36. G.W. Gibbons, Nucl. Phys. B207 (1982) 337; G.W. Gibbons and K. Maeda,
Nucl. Phys. B298 (1988) 741; D. Garﬁnkle, G.T. Horowitz and A. Strominger, Phys. Rev. D43, (1991) 3140; C.F. Holzhey and F. Wilczek, Nucl.
Phys. B380 (1992) 447; R. Kallosh, A. Linde, T. Ortin, A. Peet, A. Van
Proeyen, Phys.Rev. D46 (992) 5278.
37. M.J. Duﬀ, R.R. Khuri, R. Minasian and J. Rahmfeld, Nucl. Phys. B418
(1994) 195.
38. G.W. Gibbons, G.T. Horowitz and P.K. Townsend, Higher-dimensional
resolution of dilatonic black hole singularities, Class. Quantum Grav. in
press.
39. J. Gauntlett, Nucl. Phys. B400 (1993) 103.
42

40. P. Ruback, Commun. Math. Phys. 107 (1986) 93.
41. K. Shiraishi, J. Math. Phys. 34 (4) (1993) 1480.
42. M.J. Duﬀ and J.X. Lu, Nucl. Phys. B390 (1993) 276.
43. A.G. Felce and T.M. Samols, Phys. Lett. B308 (1993) 30.
44. Bluhm, P. Goddard and L. Dolan, Nucl. Phys. B289 (1987), 364; B309
(1988) 330.
45. J. Maharana and J.H. Schwarz, Nucl. Phys. B390 (1993) 3.
46. M. de Roo, Nucl. Phys. B255 (1985) 515.
47. J. Gauntlett, J. Harvey and J. Liu, Nucl. Phys. B409 (1993) 363; J.
Gauntlett and J. Harvey, S-Duality and the spectrum of magnetic monopoles
in heterotic string theory, preprint EFI-94-36.
48. R. Sorkin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51 (1983) 87 ; D. Gross and M. Perry, Nucl.
Phys. B226 (1983) 29.
49. R.R. Khuri, Phys. Lett. B259 (1991) 261.
50. R.R. Khuri, Nucl. Phys. B387 (1992) 315.
51. T. Banks, M. Dine, H. Dijkstra and W. Fischler, Phys. Lett. B 212 (1988)
45.
52. C.M. Hull, in preparation.
53. R. Nepomechie, Phys. Rev. D31 (1985) 1921.
54. A. Strominger, Nucl. Phys. B343 (1990) 167.
55. M.J. Duﬀ and J.X. Lu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66 (1991) 1402.
56. C.M. Hull, Nucl. Phys. B260 (1985) 182 ; L. Alvarez-Gaumé and P.
Ginsparg, Commun. Math. Phys. 102 (1985) 311.
57. G.T. Horowitz and A.A. Tseytlin, I.C. preprints Imperial /TP/93-94/38,
Imperial /TP/93-94/54.
43

58. J. Dai, R.G. Leigh and J. Polchinski, Mod. Phys. Lett. A4 (1989) 2073; M.
Dine, P. Huet and N. Seiberg, Nucl. Phys. B322 (1989) 301.
59. M. Atiyah and N. Hitchin, Phys. Lett. 107A (1985) 21; Phil. Trans. R.
Soc. Lond. A315 (1985) 459; The Geometry and Dynamics of Magnetic
Monopoles, Princeton University Press (1988).
60. B. Julia in Supergravity and Superspace, S.W. Hawking and M. Rocek, C.U.P.
Cambridge, 1981.
61. B. Julia in Lectures in Applied Mathematics, AMS, vol. 21, 355, 1985.
62. M.J. Duﬀ and J.X. Lu, Nucl. Phys. B347 (1990) 394.
63. R.W. Gebert and H. Nicolai, DESY-94-106, hep-th 9406175.
64. Supergravity Theories in Diverse Dimensions, A. Salam and E. Sezgin (eds.),
World Scientiﬁc, Singapore.
65. A. Sen, Tata Inst. preprint TIFR-TH-94-19, hep-th 9408083.
66. E.Cremmer, in Supergravity and Superspace, S.W. Hawking and M. Rocek,
C.U.P. Cambridge, 1981.
67. C. Teitelboim, Phys. Lett. B67 (1986) 63 and 69.
68. A. Achúcarro, J. Evans, P.K. Townsend and D. Wiltshire, Phys. Lett. 198B
(1987) 441.
69. C.M. Hull, Phys. Lett. 139B (1984) 39.
70. M.J. Duﬀ, G.W. Gibbons and P.K. Townsend, Phys. Lett. 332 B (1994)
321.
71. A. Sen, Phys.Lett. B329, (1994) 217.
72. C. Vafa and E. Witten, Harvard preprint HUTP-94-A017, hep-th/9408074.
73. P.K. Townsend, Phys. Lett. 202B (1988) 53.

44

