Lecture 14: Thermal conductivity

Review: phonons as particles

In chapter 5, we have been considering quantized waves in solids to be particles and this becomes very
important when we discuss thermal conductivity. In discussing thermal conductivity, we often think of a
‘gas’ of phonons, and the table below makes this more concrete via a comparison to a classical gas.

                                   Classical gas (molecules)          Phonon gas
 Number                            fixed                              Population depends on
                                                                      frequency of mode and
                                                                      temperature:
                                                                                          1
                                                                             〈〉 = ℏ/ 
                                                                                          −1
                                                                      (What are the limits of this
                                                                      expression for very small T and
                                                                      for very large T)?
                                                                      Small T:  ℏ/  ≫ 1 →
                                                                      〈〉~−ℏ/ 
                                                                                ℏ
                                                                                          ℏ
                                                                      Large T:    ~1 +  
                                                                                           
                                                                                〈〉~ /ℏ
 Relationship between energy                 = 2 /2               Depends on which branch you
 and momentum                      For each particle                  are considering (see chapter 4),
                                                                      but for acoustic phonons near
                                                                      k=0, ~  where k is crystal
                                                                      momentum and  is speed of
                                                                      sound
 Relationship between              For an N-particle gas               = ∑ ∑ < , > ℏ, =
 temperature and total internal               = 3                                   ℏ,
 energy                                                                   = ∑ ∑ ℏ / 
                                                                               
                                                                                     ,  − 1
 Collisions                        Molecules collide with each        Phonons collide with each
                                   other and with walls of vessel     other, with surface of crystal,
                                                                      and with impurities
 Energy conserved in collisions?   Yes                                Yes
 Momentum conserved in             Yes, except for at walls           Yes, modulo a reciprocal lattice
 collisions?                                                          vector G
 Number of particles conserved     Yes                                No
 in collision?


Thermal conductivity

Thermal conductivity is defined as heat flow in response to a temperature gradient
                                                       
                                              = −
                                                       
 is the energy transmitted across a unit area per unit time and K is the thermal conductivity
coefficient. The negative sign reflects the intuitive fact that ‘heat’ flows from hot regions into cold
regions.

We encounter thermal conductivity in many ways in the real world

       When we heat up a large pan on a tiny electric burner and we have to wait for the edges to
        reach the same temperature as the center
       When we touch two different materials in thermal equilibrium with the same room, such as
        wood and marble, and the latter feels cooler to the touch (the higher thermal conductivity of
        marble draws heat away from your fingers to the ‘cooler’ side which you are not touching)
       A challenge in modern electronics is to draw heat away from the processor, and appropriate
        materials with high thermal conductivity can serve this purpose

Temperature is an incoherent phenomenon—changes in temperature of a system are associated with
changes in entropy. Thus, heat flow is not a ballistic process, but rather, involves a lot of collisions. As a
starting point, we continue with a particle-like treatment of phonons. As shown earlier, at higher
temperature, there is higher occupation or population of phonons modes with energy less than or
comparable to the temperature. As these phonons diffuse to the cooler side of a solid, they will scatter
many times and the value of the thermal conductivity coefficient will depend on how often they scatter.
                                                      1
                                                    = ℓ
                                                      3
C is the heat capacity (at constant volume, per unit volume), v is the average particle velocity, and ℓ is
the mean free path between collisions. The factors of v and ℓ are fairly intuitive (why?), but C needs
some explaining.

When a particle moves from a region with temperature  + Δ to a region with temperature T¸it will
give up Δ of energy.

If this particle moves a distance of one mean free path in this process,
                                                         
                                            Δ =      ℓ =     
                                                          
Where  is the average time between collisions. The subscript x has been added because the
temperature gradient is only in the x-direction for now

The net flux of energy is:
                                                         1           
                                     =  < 2 >      =  〈 2 〉
                                                         3           
There is a factor of 2 because the first factor of  comes from the amount of energy the particle gives
up and the second factor comes from the rate of flow of these particles. The number of particles is
denoted by n and nc=C is the heat capacity per unit volume (n is particle density, number/volume).
              1     
Thus,  = − ℓ         and the previous ‘assertion’ for the expression for K is confirmed
              3     

Causes of thermal resistivity
Phonons are not conducted ballistically from one end of the sample to another (if this were the case,
thermal conductivity would solely be determined by sound velocity). Instead, a number of scattering
processes introduce a ‘thermal resistivity’ (resistivity is inverse of conductivity). These include:

       Imperfections in the crystal such as impurities, inhmogeneities, and crystal grain boundaries
       The edge or surface of the crystal
       Scattering off another phonon (this requires an anharmonic potential, which typically holds for
        real materials because the atomic potential is not perfectly quadratic)

We begin by considering the latter:

Imagine a process where two phonons of momentum  and  collide and produce a third phonon
with momentum  . Another way to say this is that two phonons annihilate and produce a new one
with momentum  =  +  .




Following this process, the occupation numbers of these three modes is as follows:

                                           →  − 1 =  ′

                                           →  − 1 =  ′

                                           →  + 1 =  ′

Energy conservation requires that:

         ℏ( ) +  ℏ( ) +  ℏ( ) =  ′ℏ( ) +  ′ℏ( ) +  ′ℏ( )

             =  ℏ( ) − ℏ ( ) +  ℏ( ) − ℏ ( ) +  ℏ( ) + ℏ( )

                                   0 = −ℏ( ) − ℏ( ) + ℏ ( )
Momentum conservation requires that:

                                            +  =  + 
Where G is a reciprocal lattice vector.

To make both of these expressions completely generic, we can write:

       Energy conservation:∑ ℏ (),, − ∑ ℏ ,, = 0
       Momentum conservation: ∑ ,, = ∑ ,, + 

Where the sum over p denotes a sum over all phonon branches (“polarization branches”).
The factor of G is needed because phonon momentum is only defined modulo a reciprocal lattice vector,
so if the sum of two phonon momenta is located outside the first Brillouin zone, it is mapped onto an
equivalent momentum in the first Brillouin zone by translating by a reciprocal lattice vector. If  ≠ 0 is
needed to make the equality above hold, the scattering is called an Umklapp process. If G=0, it is called
a normal scattering process. It should be noted that only Umklapp processes contribute to a material’s
thermal resistivity.




Comparison of normal (left) and umklapp(right) processes. The grey square marks the first Brillouin zone
in two dimensions, and for a square lattice, the intersection points between the first Brillouin zone and
                          
the  ,  axes are at ± 

To show that only umklapp processes contribute to thermal resistivity, we consider the sum over all
phonon scattering processes

                                   = ∑                ∑           ()
                                             ∈1  

The outer sum sums over all phonon branches (e.g. all acoustic and optical dispersions) and the inner
sum counts all momenta in the first Brillouin zone. The terms being added together include the
momentum (vector) of each phonon mode being considered (K) multiplied by how many of them there
are ( ()).

If only normal scattering processes are included  = 0 because for every K, there is a –K in the first
                                               1
Brillouin zone and  () =  (−) =
                                          ℏ /  −1

In the context of thermal conductivity, what this means is that if you heat up one side of a rod, you will
change the occupation numbers of phonon modes, but if these phonons can only scatter via normal
processes, they will propagate down the length of the rod with no thermal resistance.

Now consider a situation where Umklapp processes are allowed.

                   =  −  = ∑ ,, − ( ∑ ,, + )
                                                                       

 = 1  + 2  + 3  is any reciprocal lattice vector, so when we have many terms contributing to
G, we accommodate this by making the integers 1 , 2 , 3 as large as needed
When we consider Umklapp processes, we do not have the same cancellation as we did without and
 = .

Even if we fold this back into the first Brillouin zone, we are still left with a non-zero net momentum (′)
which contributes a net drift velocity between collisions which is not zero.

Consider two temperature regimes:

    1) Temperature much larger than the Debye temperature ( ≫ ) :
                                       1         
       at high temperature  () = ℏ/  ≈  (from taylor expanding exponent to first
                                              −1   ℏ ()
        order)
                    1
        Using  = 3 ℓ = 〈 2 〉, C is independent of temperature in this high temperature regime, but
         is not.
                                 1
        The collision frequency ( ) should be proportional to the number of phonons that a given
                                                    1       1
        phonon can collide with and thus  ∝  ∝        ∝       . In reality,  ∝ 1/  where x is between 1
                                                           
       and 2.
       High temperature not only ensures that C is constant as a function of temperature, but it also
       ensures that Umklapp processes have a reasonable probability of happening because it allows
       for sufficient thermal population of higher momentum (which are also higher frequency)
       acoustic phonons.
    2)  ≪ 
       At low temperature, only low energy (and low momentum) acoustic modes will have substantial
       thermal population, so Umklapp processes will be unlikely and phonon-phonon scattering will
       not contribute to thermal resistivity

Imperfections

Geometric effects can decrease the thermal conductivity if they increase a length scale shorter than ℓ.

For instance, if the material is in a reduced geometry (e.g. a thin film or a nanowire) with minimum
dimension length D

                                                  ≈ 
This also holds if the material consists of small crystallites of dimension D—phonons can scatter at the
boundary between crystallites of different orientations and reduce the thermal conductivity

Example:

Thermal conductivity of insulating solids at room temperature (insulating so we don’t have to deal with
electrons’ contribution to thermal conductivity)

 Material        K (W/m K)   v (m/s)                 Debye T
 Diamond         2200        12,000                  1320K
 Silicon         130         5000                    645K
 KCl             6.5         2273                    240K
 SiO2            130         3962                    470K
       This table illustrates the general scaling between thermal conductivity, sound velocity, and
        Debye temperature, which makes sense since both K and  depend on v
       Diamond is characterized by a high thermal conductivity, and this is how one tests to see if a
        material is a diamond. Physically, the large sound velocity, which produces high thermal
        conductivity and Debye temperature, originates from very light atoms (carbon) connected by
        very stiff covalent bonds

Overview of Chapter 5

It is common knowledge that atoms “vibrate more” at higher temperature, and in this chapter we
quantified this aphorism using the quantum nature of atomic lattice vibrations.

A key step in doing this is recognizing/believing/decreeing that phonons are bosons, and thus any
number of particles can occupy a given ‘state’ which is defined by a momentum, frequency, and
‘polarization’ (a polarization is a distinct dispersion branch).

For a state with a given frequency, its expected occupation number is given by the Planck distribution
                                                               1
                                              〈〉 =
                                                          ℏ/  − 1
This occupation number allows us to derive heat capacity, thermal expansion (if we were to do a more
rigorous derivation than the textbook), and thermal conductivity.

A state with a given frequency also has an associated crystal momentum because elastic waves in
crystalline solids have specific relationships between frequency and momentum called dispersion
relations.

Using boundary conditions, we can show that crystal momentum is quantized, with permissible
                                          2        4         
momenta (in 1 dimension) given by: 0, ±        ,±        ,…±        where N is the number of atoms in the chain,
                                                             
and L is the length of the chain.

Because any given K only allows specific frequencies to satisfy the equations of motion (this is what we
solved for in Ch. 4), the statement above also means that only certain specific  are allowed for each K.
The number of permissible  for each K is determined by how many phonon branches exist in the
material. For a D dimensional solid with p atoms in the basis, there are D acoustic branches and D(p-1)
optical branches. Each unique combination of , , and  defines a ‘normal mode’ or a
‘state’ that can be occupied by n phonons. Although K and polarization (again, polarization is a term the
book uses, and it is not exactly the same as light polarization…it is just an index to count all the phonon
branches you have) help define the state you are considering, only the frequency, , relative to the
temperature will determine the occupation of each state.
The density of states, () is a concept that we use to convert () dispersion relations into
information we can use to determine occupation numbers. The density of states, as the name implies, is
the number of states available between frequency  and frequency  + . Density of states depends
on the details of the dispersion relation and the dimensionality, but it does not depend on temperature
(unless temperature changed the dispersion relations). Occupation number is a separate issue from the
density of states.
                                                                                   2 
In three dimensions, a generic expression for the density of states is:  () =
                                                                                  2 2 

If we had an analytic or computational expression for () we could invert it to get () and
take a derivative to get / and the density of states. But sometimes it is equally useful to
make a physically motivated approximation, and the Debye model is such an approximation
which works well for predicting behavior of real materials. The Debye model only considers
acoustic phonons and approximates all acoustic branches as having the same group velocity v.
There is also a cutoff frequency,  , which defines the highest frequency phonon which is
allowed in the debye model. This frequency also defines a momentum  =  / and a
Debye temperature  = ℏ / . The Debye temperature is physically significant because it
represents roughly the temperature at which a ‘phonon gas’ starts acting like a classical gas.
The Debye model gives a closed-form approximation for heat capacity in the limit of low
temperature and high temperature (low and high relative to ).
              124         3
Low T:  ≈           ( ) (This is consistent with experiments)
                5         

High T:  ≈ 3 (This is also consistent with experiments and with a classical gas)
In almost every concept we have discussed in this chapter, a particle ‘velocity’ has come into
play, and this is essentially the speed of sound. Thus, the speed of sound in a solid, technically
given by / near k=0, is a crucial parameter determining how non-electromagnetic (e.g.
thermal, but also vibrational and elastic wave) information is transmitted from one end of a
solid to another.
